Tutorial: Solving a structure with SAD data
-------------------------------------------

Introduction
------------

This tutorial will use some good SAD data (peak wavelength from an
IF5A dataset diffracting to 1.7 A) as an example of how to solve a SAD
dataset with AutoSol. It is designed to be read all the way through,
giving pointers for you along the way. Once you have read it all and run
the example data and looked at the output files, you will be in a good
position to run your own data through AutoSol.

Setting up to run PHENIX
------------------------

If PHENIX is already installed and your environment is all set, then if
you type:

::

    echo $PHENIX

then you should get back something like this:

::

    /xtal//phenix-1.3

If instead you get:

::

    PHENIX: undefined variable

then you need to set up your PHENIX environment. See the `PHENIX
installation <../install-setup-run.html>`__ page for details of how to do this. If you
are using the C-shell environment (**csh**) then all you will need to do
is add one line to your **.cshrc** (or equivalent) file that looks like
this:

::

    source /xtal/phenix-1.3/phenix_env

(except that the path in this statement will be where **your** PHENIX is
installed). Then the next time you log in **$PHENIX** will be defined.

Running the demo p9 data with AutoSol
-------------------------------------

To run AutoSol on the demo p9 data, make yourself a **tutorials**
directory and **cd** into that directory:

::

    mkdir tutorials
    cd tutorials

Now type the phenix command:

::

    phenix.run_example --help

to list the available examples. Choosing **p9-sad** for this tutorial,
you can now use the phenix command:

::

    phenix.run_example p9-sad

to solve the p9 structure with AutoSol. This command will copy the
directory **$PHENIX/examples/p9-sad** to your current directory
(**tutorials**) and call it **tutorials/p9-sad/** . Then it will run
AutoSol using the command file **run.sh** that is present in this
**tutorials/p9-sad/** directory.

This command file **run.sh** is simple. It says:

::

    #!/bin/sh
    phenix.autosol  seq_file=seq.dat sites=4 atom_type=Se  data=p9_se_w2.sca  \
    space_group="I4" unit_cell="113.949 113.949  32.474 90.000  90.000  90.00"  \
    resolution=2.4 thoroughness=quick

The first line (**#!/bin/sh**) tells the system to interpret the
remainder of the text in the file using the sh (or bash) -shell
(**sh**).

The command **phenix.autosol** runs the command-line version of AutoSol
(see `Automated Structure Solution using AutoSol <../reference/autosol.html>`__ for
all the details about AutoSol including a full list of keywords). The
arguments on the command line tell AutoSol about the sequence file
(**seq\_file=seq.dat**), the number of sites to look for (**sites=4**),
and the atom type (**atom\_type=Se**). (Note that each of these is
specified with an **=** sign, and that there are no spaces around the
**=** sign.) The Phaser heavy-atom refinement and model completion
algorithm used in the AutoSol SAD phasing will add additional sites if
warranted.

Note the backslash "\\" at the end of some of the lines in the
**phenix.autosol** command. This tells the C-shell (which interprets
everything in this file) that the next line is a continuation of the
current line. There must be no characters (not even a space) after the
backslash for this to work.

The SAD data to be used to solve the structure is in the datafile
**p9\_se\_w2.sca**. This datafile is in Scalepack unmerged format, which
means that there may be multiple instances of each reflection and the
cell parameters are not in the file, so we need to provide the cell
parameters with the command, **unit\_cell="113.949 113.949 32.474 90.000
90.000 90.00"**. (Note that the cell parameters are surrounded by
quotation marks. That tells the parser that these are all together.) In
this example, the space group in the **p9\_se\_w2.sca** file is **I41**,
but the correct space group is **I4**, so we need to tell AutoSol the
correct space group with **space\_group="I4"**.

The resolution of the data in **p9\_se\_w2.sca** is to 1.74 A, but in
this example we would like to solve the structure quickly, so we have
cut the resolution back with the commands **resolution=2.4** and
**thoroughness=quick**. The **quick** command sets several defaults to
give a less comprehensive search for heavy-atom sites and a less
thorough model-building than if you use the default of
**thoroughness=thorough**.

Although the **phenix.run\_example p9-sad** command has just run AutoSol
from a script (**run.sh**), you can run AutoSol yourself from the
command line with the same **phenix.autosol seq\_file= ...** command.
You can also run AutoSol from a GUI, or by putting commands in another
type of script file. All these possibilities are described in `Using the
PHENIX Wizards <../reference/running-wizards.html>`__.

Where are my files?
-------------------

Once you have started AutoSol or another Wizard, an **output directory**
will be created in your current (working) directory. The first time you
run AutoSol in this directory, this **output directory** will be called
**AutoSol\_run\_1\_** (or **AutoSol\_run\_1\_/**, where the slash at the
end just indicates that this is a directory). All of the output from run
**1** of AutoSol will be in this directory. If you run AutoSol again, a
new subdirectory called **AutoSol\_run\_2\_** will be created.

Inside the directory **AutoSol\_run\_1\_** there will be one or more
temporary directories such as **TEMP0** created while the Wizard is
running. The files in this temporary directory may be useful sometimes
in figuring out what the Wizard is doing (or not doing!). By default
these directories are emptied when the Wizard finishes (but you can keep
their contents with the command **clean\_up=False** if you want.)

What parameters did I use?
--------------------------

Once the AutoSol wizard has started (when run from the command line), a
**parameters file** called **autosol.eff** will be created in your
**output directory** (e.g., **AutoSol\_run\_1\_/autosol.eff**). This
**parameters file** has a header that says what command you used to run
AutoSol, and it contains all the starting values of all parameters for
this run (including the defaults for all the parameters that you did not
set).

The **autosol.eff** file is good for more than just looking at the
values of parameters, though. If you copy this file to a new one (for
example **autosol\_hires.eff**) and edit it to change the values of some
of the parameters (**resolution=1.74**) then you can re-run AutoSol with
the new values of your parameters like this:

::

    phenix.autosol autosol_hires.eff

This command will do everything just the same as in your first run but
use all the data to 1.74 A.

*Reading the log files for your AutoSol run file*
-------------------------------------------------

While the AutoSol wizard is running, there are several places you can
look to see what is going on. The most important one is the overall log
file for the AutoSol run. This log file is located in:

::

    AutoSol_run_1_/AutoSol_run_1_1.log

for run **1** of AutoSol. (The second **1** in this log file name will
be incremented if you stop this run in the middle and restart it with a
command like **phenix.autosol run=1**).

The **AutoSol\_run\_1\_1.log** file is a running summary of what the
AutoSol Wizard is doing. Here are a few of the key sections of the log
files produced for the **p9** SAD dataset.

Summary of the command-line arguments
-------------------------------------

Near the top of the log file you will find:

::

    ------------------------------------------------------------
    Starting AutoSol with the command:

    phenix.autosol seq_file=seq.dat sites=4 atom_type=Se data=p9_se_w2.sca space_group=I4   \
    unit_cell='113.949 113.949  32.474 90.000  90.000  90.00' resolution=2.4   \
    thoroughness=quick

This is just a repeat of how you ran AutoSol; you can copy it and paste
it into the command line to repeat this run.

ImportRawData.
--------------

The input data file **p9\_se\_w2.sca** is in unmerged Scalepack format.
The AutoSol wizard converts everything to premerged Scalepack format
before proceeding. Here is where the AutoSol Wizard identifies the
format and then calls the ImportRawData Wizard:

::

    HKLIN ENTRY:  p9_se_w2.sca
    GUESS FILE TYPE MERGE TYPE sca unmerged
    LABELS['I', 'SIGI']
    CONTENTS: ['p9_se_w2.sca', 'sca', 'unmerged', 'I 41', None, None, ['I', 'SIGI']]
    Converting the files ['p9_se_w2.sca'] to sca format before proceeding
    Running import directly...
    WIZARD:  ImportRawData

Using the datafiles converted to premerged format.
--------------------------------------------------

After completing the ImportRawData step, the AutoSol Wizard goes back to
the beginning, but uses the newly-converted file
**p9\_se\_w2\_PHX.sca**:

::

    HKLIN ENTRY:  AutoSol_run_1_/p9_se_w2_PHX.sca
    FILE TYPE scalepack_merge
    GUESS FILE TYPE MERGE TYPE sca premerged
    LABELS['IPLUS', 'SIGIPLUS', 'IMINU', 'SIGIMINU']
    Unit cell: (113.949, 113.949, 32.474, 90, 90, 90)
    Space group: I 4 (No. 79)
    CONTENTS: ['AutoSol_run_1_/p9_se_w2_PHX.sca', 'sca', 'premerged', 'I 4',
    [113.949, 113.949, 32.473999999999997, 90.0, 90.0, 90.0],
    1.7443432606877809, ['IPLUS', 'SIGIPLUS', 'IMINU', 'SIGIMINU']]
    Total of 1 input data files

Guessing cell contents
----------------------

The AutoSol Wizard uses the sequence information in your sequence file
(**seq.dat**) and the cell parameters and space group to guess the
number of NCS copies and the solvent fraction, and the number of total
methionines (approximately equal to the number of heavy-atom sites for
SeMet proteins):

::


    AutoSol_guess_setup_for_scaling  AutoSol  Run 1 Fri Mar  7 00:53:48 2008

    Solvent fraction and resolution and ha types/scatt fact
    This is the last dataset to scale
    Guessing setup for scaling dataset 1
    SG I 4
    cell [113.949, 113.949, 32.473999999999997, 90.0, 90.0, 90.0]
    Number of residues in unique chains in seq file: 139
    Unit cell: (113.949, 113.949, 32.474, 90, 90, 90)
    Space group: I 4 (No. 79)
    CELL VOLUME :421654.580793
    N_EQUIV:8
    GUESS OF NCS COPIES: 1
    SOLVENT FRACTION ESTIMATE: 0.64
    Total residues:139
    Total Met:4
    resolution estimate: 2.4

Running phenix.xtriage
----------------------

The AutoSol Wizard automatically runs phenix.xtriage on each of your
input datafiles to analyze them for twinning, outliers, translational
symmetry, and other special conditions that you should be aware of. You
can read more about xtriage in `Data quality assessment with
phenix.xtriage <../reference/xtriage.html>`__. Part of the summary output from xtriage
for this dataset looks like this:

::


    The largest off-origin peak in the Patterson function is 6.49% of the
    height of the origin peak. No significant pseudotranslation is detected.

    The results of the L-test indicate that the intensity statistics
    behave as expected. No twinning is suspected.

Testing for anisotropy in the data
----------------------------------

The AutoSol Wizard tests for anisotropy by determining the range of
effective anisotropic B values along the principal lattice directions.
If this range is large and the ratio of the largest to the smallest
value is also large then the data are by default corrected to make the
anisotropy small (see `Analyzing and scaling the
data <../reference/autosol.html#anch26>`__ in the AutoSol web page for more discussion
of the anisotropy correction). In the **p9** case, the range of
anisotropic B values is small and no correction is made:

::

    Range of aniso B:  15.67 26.14
    Not using aniso-corrected data files as the range of aniso b  is only
    10.47  and 'remove_aniso' is not set

Choosing datafiles with high signal-to-noise
--------------------------------------------

During scaling, the AutoSol Wizard estimates the signal-to-noise in each
datafile and the resolution where there is significant signal-to-noise
(above 0.3:1 signal-to-noise). You can see this analysis in the log file
**dataset\_scale\_1.log** for dataset 1. In this case, the
signal-to-noise is 1.4 to a resolution of 2.4 A:

::

    FILE DATA:AutoSol_run_1_/p9_se_w2_PHX.sca sn: 1.420786

Running HYSS to find the heavy-atom substructure
------------------------------------------------

The HYSS (hybrid substructure search) procedure for heavy-atom searching
uses a combination of a Patterson search for 2-site solutions with
direct methods recycling. The search ends when the same solution is
found beginning with several different starting points. The HYSS log
files are named after the datafile that they are based on and the type
of differences (ano, iso) that are being used. In this **p9** SAD
dataset, the HYSS logfile is
**p9\_se\_w2\_PHX.sca\_ano\_1.sca\_hyss.log**. The key part of this HYSS
log file is:

::

     Entering search loop:

    p = peaklist index in Patterson map
    f = peaklist index in two-site translation function
    cc = correlation coefficient after extrapolation scan
    r = number of dual-space recycling cycles
    cc = final correlation coefficient

    p=000 f=000 cc=0.392 r=015 cc=0.532 [ best cc: 0.532 ]
    p=000 f=001 cc=0.381 r=015 cc=0.532 [ best cc: 0.532 0.532 ]
    Number of matching sites of top 2 structures: 6

Here a correlation coefficient of 0.5 is very good (0.1 is hopeless, 0.2
is possible, 0.3 is good) and 6 sites were found that matched in the
first two tries. The program continues until 5 structures all have
matching sites, then ends and prints out the final correlations, after
taking the top 4 sites.

Finding the hand and scoring heavy-atom solutions
-------------------------------------------------

Normally either hand of the heavy-atom substructure is a possible
solution, and both must be tested by calculating phases and examining
the electron density map and by carrying out density modification, as
they will give the same statistics for all heavy-atom analysis and
phasing steps. Note that in chiral space groups (those that have a
handedness such as **P61**, both hands of the **space group** must be
tested. The AutoSol Wizard will do this for you, inverting the hand of
the heavy-atom substructure and the space group at the same time. For
example, in space group **P61** the hand of the substructure is inverted
and then it is placed in space group **P65**.

Scoring heavy-atom solutions
----------------------------

The AutoSol Wizard scores heavy-atom solutions based on two criteria by
default. The first criterion is the skew of the electron density in the
map (**SKEW**). Good values for the skew are anything greater than 0.1.
In a SAD structure determination, the heavy-atom solution with the
correct hand may have a much more positive skew than the one with the
inverse hand. The second criterion is the correlation of local RMS
density (**CORR\_RMS**). This is a measure of how contiguous the solvent
and non-solvent regions are in the map. (If the local rms is low at one
point and also low at neighboring points, then the solvent region must
be relatively contiguous, and not split up into small regions.) For SAD
datasets, Phaser is used for calculating phases. For a SAD dataset, a
figure of merit of 0.3 is acceptable, 0.4 is fine and anything above 0.5
is very good. The scores for solution #1 are listed in the AutoSol log
file:

::

    Scoring for this solution now...

    AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/resolve.scores SKEW -0.047612928
    AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/resolve.scores CORR_RMS 0.8755398

    CC-EST (BAYES-CC) SKEW : 10.0 +/- 26.1
    CC-EST (BAYES-CC) CORR_RMS : 55.7 +/- 36.1
    Resetting sigma of quality estimate due to wide range of estimated values:
    Overall quality:  14.7
    Highest lower bound of quality for individual estimates: 37.6
    Current 2*sigma:  37.5 New 2*sigma:  45.7
    ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100:  14.7 +/- 45.7

The **ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100** is an estimate of the quality of the
experimental electron density map (not the density-modified one). A set
of real structures was used to calibrate the range of values of each
score that were obtained for phases with varying quality. The resulting
probability distributions are used above to estimate the correlation
between the experimental map and an ideal map for this structure. Then
all the estimates are combined to yield an overall Bayesian estimate of
the map quality. These are reported as CC x 100 +/- 2SD. These estimated
map CC values are usually fairly close, so as the estimate is 14.7 +/-
45.7, you can be quite confident that this solution is not the right
one.

The wizard then tries the inverse solution...

::

    Scoring for this solution now...

    AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/resolve.scores SKEW 0.2644597
    AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/resolve.scores CORR_RMS 0.9274329

    CC-EST (BAYES-CC) SKEW : 56.5 +/- 18.1
    CC-EST (BAYES-CC) CORR_RMS : 63.1 +/- 28.5
    ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100:  60.0 +/- 13.6

    Reading NCS information from:  AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/resolve.log
     based on  [ha_2.pdb,phaser_2.mtz]
    Reformatting  ha_2.pdb  and putting it in  ha_2.pdb_formatted.pdb
    RANGE to KEEP :1.28
    Confident of the hand (Quality diff from opp hand is 1.9 sigma)

This solution looks a lot better. The overall estimated map CC value is
60.0 +/- 13.6. This means that your structure is not only solved but
that you will have a good map when it is density modified.

Final phasing with Phaser
-------------------------

Once the best heavy-atom solution or solutions are chosen based on
**ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100**, these are used in a final round of phasing
with Phaser (for SAD phasing). The log file from phasing for solution
**2** is in **phaser\_2.log**. Here is the final part of the output from
this log file, showing the refined coordinates, occupancies, thermal (B)
factors for the 4 sites, along with the refined scattering factors (in
this case only f" is refined), and the final figure of merit of phasing
(0.544):

::

       Atom Parameters: 4 atoms in list
            X      Y      Z      O      B      (AnisoB) M Atomtype
       #1    0.180 -0.113 -0.681  1.135   22.8 ( ---- ) 1 SE
       #2    0.686 -0.238 -0.710  0.980   23.0 (+22.40) 1 SE
       #3    0.665 -0.206 -0.774  1.020   28.2 (+26.14) 1 SE
       #5    0.027  0.758  0.905  0.176   23.9 ( ---- ) 1 SE

       Scattering Parameters:
        Atom             f"           (f')
          SE         5.5196        -8.0000


       Figures of Merit
       ----------------
       Bin Resolution   Acentric     Centric      Single       Total
                        Number FOM   Number FOM   Number FOM   Number FOM
       ALL  28.49- 2.40   7502 0.594    874 0.140     51 0.057   8427 0.544

       log-likelihood gain -90088

Statistical density modification with RESOLVE
---------------------------------------------

After SAD phases are calculated with Phaser, the AutoSol Wizard uses
RESOLVE density modification to improve the quality of the electron
density map. The statistical density modification in RESOLVE takes
advantage of the flatness of the solvent region and the expected
distribution of electron density in the region containing the
macromolecule, as well as any NCS that can be found from the heavy-atom
substructure. The weighted structure factors and phases (FWT, PHWT) from
Phaser are used to calculate the starting map for RESOLVE, and the
experimental structure factor amplitudes (FP) and SAD
Hendrickson-Lattman coefficients from Phaser are used in the density
modification process. The output from RESOLVE for solution 1 can be
found in **resolve\_2.log**. Here are key sections of this output.

First, the plot of how many points in the "protein" region of the map
have each possible value of electron density. The plot below is
normalized so that a density of zero is the mean of the solvent region,
and the standard deviation of the density in the map is 1.0. A perfect
map has a lot of points with density slightly less than zero on this
scale (the points between atoms) and a few points with very high density
(the points near atoms), and no points with very negative density. Such
a map has a very high skew (think "skewed off to the right"). This map
is good, with a positive skew, though it is not perfect.

::


     Plot of Observed (o) and model (x) electron density distributions for protein
     region, where the model distribution is given by,
      p_model(beta*(rho+offset)) = p_ideal(rho)
     and then convoluted with a gaussian with width of sigma
     where sigma, offset and beta are given below under "Error estimate."


                              0.03..................................................
                                  .                   .                            .
                                  .                   .                            .
                                  .             xxxxxxx                            .
                                  .          ooxoooooooxxo                         .
                                  .          xxo      .  xoo                       .
                                  .         xo        .   xxo                      .
                    p(rho)        .        xx         .     xxoo                   .
                                  .      ox           .       xxooo                .
                                  .      xo           .         xxo                .
                                  .    xx             .           xxxx             .
                                  .   xo              .              xxxx          .
                                  .  xx               .                 xxxx       .
                                  xxx                 .                    xxxxx   .
                                  x                   .                       ooxxxx
                             0.0  x................................................x

                                 -2        -1         0         1         2        3

                                      normalized rho (0 = mean of solvent region)

After density modification is complete, this plot becomes much more like
one from a perfect structure:

::

                              0.03..................................................
                                  .                   .                            .
                                  .          xxxxx    .                            .
                                  .         xooooxxo  .                            .
                                  .       oxo     oxo .                            .
                                  .       xx        xo.                            .
                                  .      ox          xxoo                          .
                    p(rho)        .     ox            .xoo                         .
                                  .     x             . xo                         .
                                  .    x              .  xxxx                      .
                                  .   xx              .     xxxxo                  .
                                  .  xx               .         xxxxxxxx           .
                                  . xx                .              ooxxxxxx      .
                                  xx                  .                   o oxxxxxoo
                                  x                   .                           xo
                             0.0  o................................................x

                                 -2        -1         0         1         2        3

                                      normalized rho (0 = mean of solvent region)

The key statistic from this RESOLVE density modification is the R-factor
for comparison of observed structure factor amplitudes (FP) with those
calculated from the density modification procedure (FC). In this **p9**
SAD phasing the R-factor is very low:

::

     Overall R-factor for FC vs FP: 0.239 for       8422 reflections

An acceptable value is anything below 0.35; below 0.30 is good.

Generation of FreeR flags
-------------------------

The AutoSol Wizard will create a set of free R flags indicating which
reflections are not to be used in refinement. By default 5% of
reflections (up to a maximum of 2000) are reserved for this test set. If
you want to supply a reflection file **hires.mtz** that has higher
resolution than the data used to solve the structure, or has a test set
already marked, then you can do this with the keyword
**input\_refinement\_file=hires.mtz**. The files to be used for
model-building and refinement are listed in the AutoSol log file:

::



    FreeR_flag added to  phaser_2.mtz
    ...
    Saving  exptl_fobs_phases_freeR_flags_2.mtz  for refinement
    THE FILE AutoSol_run_1_/resolve_2.mtz will be used for model-building

Model-building with RESOLVE
---------------------------

The AutoSol Wizard by default uses a very quick method to build just the
secondary structure of your macromolecule. This is controlled by the
keyword **helices\_strands\_only=True**. The Wizard will guess from your
sequence file whether the structure is protein or RNA or DNA (but you
can tell it if you want with (**chain\_type=PROTEIN**).

If the quick model-building does not build a satisfactory model (if the
correlation of map and model is less than
**acceptable\_secondary\_structure\_cc=0.35**), then model-building is
tried again with the standard build procedure, essentially the same as
one cycle of model-building with the AutoBuild Wizard (see the web page
`Automated Model Building and Rebuilding with
AutoBuild <../reference/autobuild.html>`__, except that if you specify
**thoroughness=quick** as we have in this example, the model-building is
done less comprehensively to speed things up.

In this case the secondary-structure-only model-building produces an
initial model with 61 residues built and side chains assigned to 0, and
which has a model-map correlation of 0.33:

::

    Model with helices and strands is in  Build_1.pdb
    Log for helices and strands is in  Build_1.log
    Final file:  AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/Build_1.pdb
    Log file:  Build_1.log  copied to  Build_1.log
    Model 1: Residues built=61  placed=0  Chains=9  Model-map CC=0.33
    This is new best model with cc =  0.33
    Getting R for model:  Build_1.pdb
    Model: AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/refine_1.pdb  R/Rfree=0.55/0.58

As the model-map correlation is only 0.33, the Wizard decides that this
is not good enough and tries again with regular model-building, yielding
a better model with 86 residues built and a map correlation of 0.55:

::

    Model 2: Residues built=86  placed=7  Chains=15  Model-map CC=0.55
    This is new best model with cc =  0.55
    Refining model:  Build_2.pdb
    Model: AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/refine_2.pdb  R/Rfree=0.46/0.49

After one model completion cycle (including extending ends of chains,
fitting loops, and building outside the region already built, the best
model built has 77 residues built, 22 assigned to sequence and a map
correlation of 0.61:

::


    Model completion cycle 1
    Models to combine and extend:  ['Build_2.pdb', 'refine_2.pdb']
    Model 3: Residues built=77  placed=22  Chains=10  Model-map CC=0.61
    This is new best model with cc =  0.61
    Refining model:  Build_combine_extend_3.pdb
    Model: AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/refine_3.pdb  R/Rfree=0.45/0.47

This initial model is written out to **refine\_3.pdb** in the output
directory. It is still just a preliminary model, but it is good enough
to tell that the structure is solved. For full model-building you will
want to go on and use the AutoBuild Wizard (see the web page `Automated
Model Building and Rebuilding with AutoBuild <../reference/autobuild.html>`__ )

The AutoSol\_summary.dat summary file
-------------------------------------

A quick summary of the results of your AutoSol run is in the
**AutoSol\_summary.dat** file in your output directory. This file lists
the key files that were produced in your run of AutoSol (all these are
in the output directory) and some of the key statistics for the run,
including the scores for the heavy-atom substructure and the
model-building and refinement statistics. These statistics are listed
for all the solutions obtained, with the highest-scoring solutions
first. Here is part of the summary for this **p9** SAD dataset:

::

     -----------CURRENT SOLUTIONS FOR RUN 1 : -------------------
     *** FILES ARE IN THE DIRECTORY: AutoSol_run_1_ ****

    Solution # 2  BAYES-CC: 60.0 +/- 13.6 Dataset #1   FOM: 0.54 ----------------

    Solution  2 using HYSS on
    /net/firebird/scratch1/terwill/run_072908a/p9-sad/AutoSol_run_1_/
    p9_se_w2_PHX.sca_ano_1.sca and taking inverse. Dataset #1
    Dataset number: 1
    Dataset type: sad
    Datafiles used: [
    '/net/firebird/scratch1/terwill/run_072908a/p9-sad/AutoSol_run_1_/p9_se_w2_PHX.sca']
    Sites: 4 (Already used for Phasing at resol of 2.4)      Refined Sites: 4
    NCS information  in: AutoSol_2.ncs_spec
    Experimental phases in: phaser_2.mtz
    Experimental phases plus FreeR_flags for refinement in:
    exptl_fobs_phases_freeR_flags_2.mtz
    Density-modified phases in: resolve_2.mtz
    HA sites (PDB format) in: ha_2.pdb_formatted.pdb
    Sequence file in: seq.dat
    Model in: refine_3.pdb
      Residues built: 77
      Side-chains built: 22
      Chains: 10
      Overall model-map correlation: 0.61
      R/R-free: 0.45/0.47
    Scaling logfile in: dataset_1_scale.log
    HYSS logfile in: p9_se_w2_PHX.sca_ano_1.sca_hyss.log
    Phasing logfile in: phaser_2.log
    Density modification logfile in: resolve_2.log (R=0.24)
    Build logfile in: Build_combine_extend_3.log

     Score type:     SKEW    CORR_RMS
    Raw scores:     0.26      0.93
    BAYES-CC:      56.50     63.07

    Refined heavy atom sites (fractional):
    xyz       0.180     -0.113     -0.681
    xyz       0.686     -0.238     -0.710
    xyz       0.665     -0.206     -0.774
    xyz       0.027      0.758      0.905

How do I know if I have a good solution?
----------------------------------------

Here are some of the things to look for to tell if you have obtained a
correct solution:

-  How much of the model was built? More than 50% is good, particularly
   if you are using the default of helices\_strands\_only=True. If less
   than 25% of the model is built, then it may be entirely incorrect.
   Have a look at the model. If you see clear sets of parallel or
   antiparallel strands, or if you see helices and strands with the
   expected relationships, your model is going to be correct. If you see
   a lot of short fragments everywhere, your model and solution is going
   to be incorrect. How many side-chains were fitted to density? More
   than 25% is ok, more than 50% is very good.
-  What is the R-factor of the model? This only applies if you are
   building a full model (not for helices\_strands\_only=True). For a
   solution at moderate to high resolution (2.5 A or better) the
   R-factor should be in the low 30's to be very good. For
   lower-resolution data, an R-factor in the low 40's is probably
   largely correct but the model is not very good.
-  What was the overall signal-to-noise in the data? Above 1 is good,
   below 0.5 is very low.
-  What are the individual CC-BAYES estimates of map correlation for
   your top solution? For a good solution they are all around 50 or
   more, with 2SD uncertainties that are about 10-20.
-  What is the overall "ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100" of your top solution.
   This should also be 50 or more for a good solution. This is an
   estimate of the map correlation before density modification, so if
   you have a lot of solvent or several NCS-related copies in the
   asymmetric unit, then lower values may still give you a good map.
-  What is the difference in "ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100" between the top
   solution and its inverse? If this is large (more than the 2SD values
   for each) that is a good sign.

What to do next
---------------

Once you have run AutoSol and have obtained a good solution and model,
the next thing to do is to run the AutoBuild Wizard. If you run it in
the same directory where you ran AutoSol, the AutoBuild Wizard will pick
up where the AutoSol Wizard left off and carry out iterative
model-building, density modification and refinement to improve your
model and map. See the web page `Automated Model Building and Rebuilding
with AutoBuild <../reference/autobuild.html>`__ for details on how to run AutoBuild.

If you do not obtain a good solution, then it's not time to give up yet.
There are a number of standard things to try that may improve the
structure determination. Here are a few that you should always try:

-  Try setting thoroughness=thorough if it had previously been set to
   quick. This can make a big difference, though it takes longer.
-  Try setting max\_choices to a larger number, or desired\_coverage to
   a higher value.
-  Have a careful look at all the output files. Work your way through
   the main log file (e.g., **AutoSol\_run\_1\_1.log**) and all the
   other principal log files in order beginning with scaling
   (**dataset\_1\_scale.log**), then looking at heavy-atom searching
   (**p9\_se\_w2\_PHX.sca\_ano\_1.sca\_hyss.log**), phasing (e.g.,
   **phaser\_1.log** or **phaser\_xx.log** depending on which solution
   **xx** was the top solution) and density modification (e.g.,
   **resolve\_xx.log**). Is there anything strange or unusual in any of
   them that may give you a clue as to what to try next? For example did
   the phasing work well (high figure of merit) yet the density
   modification failed? (Perhaps the hand is incorrect). Was the solvent
   content estimated correctly? (You can specify it yourself if you
   want). What does the xtriage output say? Is there twinning or strong
   translational symmetry? Are there problems with reflections near ice
   rings? Are there many outlier reflections?
-  Try a different resolution cutoff. For example 0.5 A lower resolution
   than you tried before. Often the highest-resolution shells have
   little useful information for structure solution (though the data may
   be useful in refinement and density modification).
-  Try a different rejection criterion for outliers. The default is
   **ratio\_out=10.0** (toss reflections with delta F more than 10 times
   the rms delta F of all reflections in the shell). Try instead
   **ratio\_out=3** to toss outliers.
-  If the heavy-atom substructure search did not yield plausible
   solutions, try searching with HYSS using the command-line interface,
   and vary the resolution and number of sites you look for. Can you
   find a solution that has a higher **CC** than the one found in
   AutoSol? If so, you can read your solution in to AutoSol with
   **sites\_file=my\_sites.pdb**.
-  Was an anisotropy correction applied in AutoSol? If there is some
   anisotropy but no correction was applied, you can force AutoSol to
   apply the correction with **remove\_aniso=True**.

Additional information
----------------------

For details about the AutoSol Wizard, see `Automated structure solution
with AutoSol <../reference/autosol.html>`__. For help on running Wizards, see `Using
the PHENIX Wizards <../reference/running-wizards.html>`__.
