==============================================
Model building (and more) in the AutoBuild GUI
==============================================

NOTE:  this document is mainly an introduction for users who are not familiar
with AutoBuild (or the GUI), rather than a comprehensive
reference for the program.  The documentation for the `command-line version
<autobuild.htm>`_ covers the full range of options and functionality.

AutoBuild is the main model-building program in PHENIX; it combines density
modification and chain tracing in RESOLVE with phenix.refine to generate a
high-quality model.  It is optimized to be very thorough by default, and as
a result is one of the most processor-intensive programs in PHENIX.  Most
common protocols can be parallelized over an arbitary number of processors or
cluster nodes, however.  If you need a faster alternative, there are several
simpler building programs in PHENIX:

  - `phenix.find_helices_strands <find_helices_strands.htm>`_ performs very
    fast secondary structure fitting and chain-tracing.  It will generate a
    partial protein (or nucleic acid) backbone in a few minutes (depending on
    processor speed) but performs no refinement or sequence docking.  This
    method tends to work well for low-resolution maps, and AutoBuild has a
    similar mode.

  - `phenix.fit_loops <fit_loops.htm>`_ docks small protein loops missing from
    an incomplete model into electron density.  It can perform simple
    real-space refinement to clean up the structure.

  - `phenix.phase_and_build <phase_and_build.htm>`_ is essentially the
    model-building component of AutoSol, and like AutoBuild, it performs
    iterative density modification, model-building, and refinement.  It is
    still substantially faster than AutoBuild, usually at the cost of a few
    percent higher R-factors.  Currently only available as a command-line
    program.

-------------
Configuration
-------------

Like several other programs in PHENIX, the AutoBuild GUI can accept a variety
of files in bulk; it is also designed to be started directly from other
programs (e.g. the AutoSol and AutoMR wizards) with files pre-loaded.  At a
minimum, it requires experimental amplitudes and a source of phases (PHI/FOM
columns in the MTZ file, or a partial model), and works best when supplied with
the sequence(s) to be built.  If Hendrickson-Lattman coefficients or R-free
flags are present in the reflections file(s), these will be used as well.
Additional files for starting map coefficients and high-resolution data are
optional.

.. image:: images/autobuild_input.png

AutoBuild is limited to building one chain type at a time, and performs no
ligand fitting (the `LigandFit wizard <ligandfit_gui.htm>`_ should be used for
this).  However, additional chains may be included as a "ligand file", which
contains any existing parts of the model that you want AutoBuild to leave
untouched (it will still be used in refinement).  For non-standard ligands,
you will need to include CIF files.  Custom settings for `phenix.refine
<refine.htm>`_ (i.e. the ".eff file") may also be supplied.

If you are running AutoBuild directly from experimental phasing, the PDB file
containing heavy atoms should be included.  For selenomethionine-derivatized
proteins, the heavy atom sites will be used to anchor the methionines in the
sequence.
