=======================================
Glossary of common terms used in PHENIX
=======================================

**Atomic Displacement Parameters (ADPs)**: Also known as B-factors, ADPs
describe the variability or uncertainty in atomic positions.  The simplest
model for these (**isotropic**) is a sphere centered around the atomic position,
but at high resolution (approximately 1.5A or better) it becomes possible to
model them as ellipsoids (**anisotropic**).  At low resolution (worse than
3-3.5A) it may be necessary to refine ADPs for small groups such as entire
residues, instead of individual atoms.  The total ADPs will also include
contribution from larger displacements such as those modeled by TLS
refinement and an overall anisotropic ADP for the entire crystal.

**B-factors**: see ADPs.

**Bulk-solvent correction**: Scaling of low-resolution model-based amplitudes,
F(calc), to account for the effects of unmodelled disordered solvent in the
crystal.  Because the bulk solvent comprises such a large scattering mass in
macromolecular crystals, and the low-resolution reflections tend to dominate
the R-factor calculations, the correction step significantly decreases the
R-factors and is an essential step during refinement and map calculation.

**Constraints**: In refinement, constraints force specific parameters to be
refined together.  Examples of this include rigid-body refinement (atomic
coordinates constrained), "riding" hydrogen atoms, or grouped ADPs.  Since
constraints reduce the number of refined parameters, they are particularly
useful at low resolution. See also **restraints**.

**Density modification**: A statistically-based method of phase improvement by
real-space manipulation of electron density, which dramatically improves
experimentally phased maps.  For SAD phasing, density modification is essential
to resolve phase ambiguity and obtain an interpretable map, but it is also
very helpful for other methods.

**Figure of Merit (FOM)**: An approximate measure of phase quality, calculated
for each reflection.  Scale is from 0 to 1, higher being better.  Although it
is sometimes reported in the context of refinement and density modification,
it is only useful for evaluating initial experimental phases.  A good MAD
solution will typically have an FOM greater than 0.4, while a SAD solution
should usually be greater than 0.3.

**Hendrickson-Lattman coefficients**: Experimental phase probability values,
used in density modification and as additional restraints during refinement.
Consists of four coefficients per reflection, which describe a bimodal phase
distribution.

**Kicked map**: A faster alternative to omit maps.  All coordinates are
shaken randomly by a small amount, and the map recalculated; this is done
repeatedly and the maps averaged.  This can help remove bias and in some cases
noise as well.  Available in both `phenix.refine <refine_gui.htm>`_ and
`phenix.maps <create_maps.htm>`_.

**Map coefficients**: This is simply the Fourier coefficients for an
electron density map, in MTZ format.  Graphics programs such as Coot (and
PHENIX, internally) will perform the Fourier transform automatically to obtain
the real-space density.  Most programs in PHENIX output map coefficients
rather than pre-calculated maps, but the terms are often used interchangeably.

**Maximum likelihood**: The statistical methodology used in target functions
for refinement and phasing, in which the probability of the model given the
data is maximized.  Maximum likelihood is much better at weighting the data
appropriately than the previously used least-squares method, and leads to
greater sensitivity and improved maps.  See McCoy Acta Cryst. (2004). D60,
2169-2183 for an introduction to the method as used in crystallography.

**Miller array**: Any set of data indexed by ``h,k,l`` ("Miller indices").
This can include experimental intensities or amplitudes, phases, weights
(such as FOM), Hendrickson-Lattman coefficients, R-free flags, etc.  These are
the basic unit of reflection data in PHENIX, and may combine multiple columns
from the input file (for instance, F and SIGF in an MTZ file will be grouped
into a single Miller array containing both amplitudes and sigmas).

**Non-crystallographic symmetry (NCS)**: Symmetry within a crystal that is
independent of the lattice type; this is very common in biomolecules,
especially homo-oligomeric proteins.  Information about NCS can be used during
density modification, and as additional restraints on the conformation of
related groups during refinement.  (PHENIX does not currently support NCS
constraints, which force related molecules to be identical.)

**Occupancy**: an attribute of atoms in a structure, equal to the fraction of
unit cells in which the atom occurs in the given position.  High-resolution
structures (usually 1.6A or better) will often need occupancy refinement for
sidechains which occur in more than one conformation, or for ligands which
are not 100% bound.  The occupancy should never be set to zero in a deposited
structure.

**Omit map**: a map generated by deleting part of the structure (for instance,
a bound ligand) and recalculating phases and F(calc).  This almost always
involves simple refinement of the modified structure to remove phase bias, and
simulated annealing is recommended for best results.  A variant, the
**composite omit map**, stitches together the contribution of many individual
omit maps, which collectively omit all atoms.  In PHENIX, these may be
calculated using the `AutoBuild <autobuild.htm>`_ wizard.  See also the entry
for "kicked map".

**Overfitting**: Optimization of R-work at the expense of other quality
metrics, especially R-free.  The most obvious indication of overfitting is
divergence of R-work and R-free, which ideally should decrease in sync
throughout refinement.  In most cases, the solution is to add or tighten
restraints, or reduce the number of refined parameters.

**Restraints**: In refinement, restraints keep specific independent parameters
from diverging too far.  At most resolutions, basic geometry restraints
(bonds, bond angles, dihedral angles, chiral centers, planar groups, and
VDW interactions) and ADP similarity restraints will be used.  Depending on
the specific structure and data, additional restraints may include experimental
phase distributions (see **Hendrickson-Lattman coefficients**) or restraints
between related molecules (**NCS** or a reference structure).  Restraints do
not reduce the number of refined parameters, but are essential to maintain
proper geometry and prevent overfitting.  However, they become less necessary
as resolution increases, and restraining a high-resolution model too tightly
will actually make it worse.  See also **constraints**.

**R-factor**: Crystallographic residual, equal to sum(abs(Fobs)-abs(Fcalc)) /
sum(abs(Fobs)).
R-merge, R-sym, etc. are calculated similarly using redundant observations
instead of Fc.  Generating Fc at random will typically result in an R-factor
of 0.55, which is therefore the threshold for determining if a model is placed
correctly.  (Note that in practice, molecular replacement solutions often have
higher starting R-factors, but these will rapidly drop during refinement if
the solution is correct.)

**R-free**: R-factor calculated from reflections not used in refinement,
typically 5-10% of the data (in statistical terminology this is called
"cross-validation").  If the refinement was parameterized appropriately,
the R-free should be reduced along with the R-factor the "working" set (R-work),
although it will always be a higher value.  An increase in R-free indicates
an incorrect optimization, even if R-work decreases.  A large spread between
R-work and R-free is a primary symptom of overfitting.

**Rotamer**: A well-defined unique combination of dihedral angle values in
a group of atoms; the term is almost always used in reference to amino acid
sidechains.  The rotamers used in Phenix are extracted from a set of
high-quality, high-resolution structures (the Top500 database).  The vast
majority of sidechains in a finished structure should be recognizably
rotameric unless the density very clearly supports an outlier conformation.
Because the standard geometry restraints and minimization methods often do a
poor job moving sidechains into rotameric positions, a separate rotamer-
fitting step is available in ``phenix.refine``.

**Simulated annealing**: An optimization method which heats up a system and
allows it to slowly cool, as a way of escaping local energy minima where
simple gradient-based minimization fails.  In crystallography, this means
running a simple molecular dynamics simulation starting at very high
temperatures (~2500 K), with the agreement with X-ray data included as an
additional pseudo-energy term.  Especially useful for poorly built structures
early in refinement, and as a method to remove phase bias (e.g. for omit maps).
In PHENIX, both Cartesian and torsion-angle dynamics are available; the latter
is intended for low-resolution refinement as it uses fewer parameters.

**Skew**: Statistic derived from the distribution of electron density values
in an experimentally phased map.  The skew describes the deviation from a
Gaussian distribution; a correct map will have a slight skew towards higher
values.  A skew above 0.2 is usually indicative of successful phasing.

**Turn, Libration, and Screw (TLS)**: A way of describing anisotropic motion
for rigid groups of atoms which move collectively in the crystal.  These are
usually separate chains, or domains in a flexible protein, but there is no
restriction on the size of groups.  Refining TLS parameters will result in
all atoms that are part of a TLS group being treated as anisotropic - in this
sense, it is essentially constrained anisotropic refinement.  Because it
only adds ten parameters per group, TLS refinement is suitable for almost any
resolution.
