Tutorial 2: Solving a structure with MAD data
---------------------------------------------

Introduction
------------

This tutorial will use some moderately good MAD data (3 wavelengths from
a gene-5 protein SeMet dataset diffracting to 2.6 A) as an example of
how to solve a MAD dataset with AutoSol. It is designed to be read all
the way through, giving pointers for you along the way. Once you have
read it all and run the example data and looked at the output files, you
will be in a good position to run your own data through AutoSol.

Setting up to run PHENIX
------------------------

If PHENIX is already installed and your environment is all set, then if
you type:

::

    echo $PHENIX

then you should get back something like this:

::

    /xtal//phenix-1.3

If instead you get:

::

    PHENIX: undefined variable

then you need to set up your PHENIX environment. See the `PHENIX
installation <install.htm>`__ page for details of how to do this. If you
are using the C-shell environment (**csh**) then all you will need to do
is add one line to your **.cshrc** (or equivalent) file that looks like
this:

::

    source /xtal/phenix-1.3/phenix_env

(except that the path in this statement will be where **your** PHENIX is
installed). Then the next time you log in **$PHENIX** will be defined.

Running the demo gene-5 data with AutoSol
-----------------------------------------

To run AutoSol on the demo gene-5 data, make yourself a **tutorials**
directory and **cd** into that directory:

::

    mkdir tutorials
    cd tutorials 

Now type the phenix command:

::

    phenix.run_example --help 

to list the available examples. Choosing **gene-5-mad** for this
tutorial, you can now use the phenix command:

::

    phenix.run_example gene-5-mad 

to solve the gene-5 structure with AutoSol. This command will copy the
directory **$PHENIX/examples/gene-5-mad** to your current directory
(**tutorials**) and call it **tutorials/gene-5-mad/** . Then it will run
AutoSol using the command file **run.sh** that is present in this
**tutorials/gene-5-mad/** directory.

This command file **run.sh** is simple. It says:

::

    #!/bin/sh
    echo "Running AutoSol on gene-5 protein data..."
    phenix.autosol  gene-5-mad.eff

The first line (**#!/bin/sh**) tells the system to interpret the
remainder of the text in the file using the sh (or bash) -shell
(**sh**).

The command **phenix.autosol gene-5-mad.eff** runs the command-line
version of AutoSol with the parameters in the file gene-5-mad.eff (see
`Automated Structure Solution using AutoSol <autosol.htm>`__ for all the
details about AutoSol including a full list of keywords).

The file gene-5-mad.eff is a typical PHENIX parameters file:

::

    # parameters for autosol run with gene-5 3-wavelength MAD data
    # 
    autosol {
      atom_type = Se
      sites = 2
      seq_file = sequence.dat
      crystal_info {
        space_group = C2 
        unit_cell = 76.08 27.97 42.36 90 103.2 90
        resolution = 2.6
      }
      wavelength {
        data = high.sca
        lambda = 0.9600
        f_prime = -1.5
        f_double_prime = 3
      }
      wavelength {
        data = peak.sca
        lambda = 0.9792
        f_prime = -3
        f_double_prime = 4
      }
      wavelength {
        data = infl.sca
        lambda = 0.9798
        f_prime = -5
        f_double_prime = 2
      }
    }

Notice how the brackets ({ and }) work in this file. Everything in this
file after the word "autosol" that is between the opening left-bracket
({) and and the closing right-bracket (}) is part of the autosol
"scope". The AutoSol wizard looks for "autosol { lots of parameters }"
and interprets everything inside these brackets. Everything outside the
scope "autosol" is ignored.

Within the autosol scope there are some keywords like "atom\_type = Se",
these are normally one per line.

There are also additional scopes, with keywords inside them. For example
the space\_group and unit\_cell information are inside the scope
"crystal\_info".

The information about each wavelength of data is in a separate scope
called "wavelength". You can have as many of these as you like. Within
this scope you can define the datafile name, the wavelength (lambda),
and f\_prime and f\_double\_prime values for that wavelength.

The MAD data to be used to solve the structure is in the datafiles
**peak.sca**, **infl.sca** and **high.sca** These datafiles are in
Scalepack premerged format, which means that there is just one instance
of each reflection and the cell parameters are in the file, so we do not
need to provide the cell parameters or the space group (unless the ones
in the .sca files are incorrect!)

The resolution of the data is to about 2.6 A.

Although the **phenix.run\_example gene-5-mad** command has just run
AutoSol from a script (**run.sh**), you can run AutoSol yourself from
the command line with the same **phenix.autosol gene-5-mad.eff**
command. You can also run AutoSol from a GUI. `Running a Wizard from a
GUI, the command-line <running-wizards.htm>`__.

Where are my files?
-------------------

Once you have started AutoSol or another Wizard, an **output directory**
will be created in your current (working) directory. The first time you
run AutoSol in this directory, this **output directory** will be called
**AutoSol\_run\_1\_** (or **AutoSol\_run\_1\_/**, where the slash at the
end just indicates that this is a directory). All of the output from run
**1** of AutoSol will be in this directory. If you run AutoSol again, a
new subdirectory called **AutoSol\_run\_2\_** will be created.

Inside the directory **AutoSol\_run\_1\_** there will be one or more
temporary directories such as **TEMP0** created while the Wizard is
running. The files in this temporary directory may be useful sometimes
in figuring out what the Wizard is doing (or not doing!). By default
these directories are emptied when the Wizard finishes (but you can keep
their contents with the command **clean\_up=False** if you want.)

What parameters did I use?
--------------------------

Once the AutoSol wizard has started (when run from the command line), a
**parameters file** called **autosol.eff** will be created in your
**output directory** (e.g., **AutoSol\_run\_1\_/autosol.eff**). This
**parameters file** has a header that says what command you used to run
AutoSol, and it contains all the starting values of all parameters for
this run (including the defaults for all the parameters that you did not
set).

The **autosol.eff** file is good for more than just looking at the
values of parameters, though. If you copy this file to a new one (for
example **autosol\_lores.eff**) and edit it to change the values of some
of the parameters (**resolution=3.0**) then you can re-run AutoSol with
the new values of your parameters like this:

::

    phenix.autosol autosol_lores.eff

This command will do everything just the same as in your first run but
use only the data to 3.0 A.

*Reading the log files for your AutoSol run file*
-------------------------------------------------

While the AutoSol wizard is running, there are several places you can
look to see what is going on. The most important one is the overall log
file for the AutoSol run. This log file is located in:

::

    AutoSol_run_1_/AutoSol_run_1_1.log

for run **1** of AutoSol. (The second **1** in this log file name will
be incremented if you stop this run in the middle and restart it with a
command like **phenix.autosol run=1**).

The **AutoSol\_run\_1\_1.log** file is a running summary of what the
AutoSol Wizard is doing. Here are a few of the key sections of the log
files produced for the **gene-5** MAD dataset.

Summary of the command-line arguments
-------------------------------------

Near the top of the log file you will find:

::

     ------------------------------------------------------------
    Starting AutoSol with the command:

    phenix.autosol

    Reading effective parameters from gene-5-mad.eff

This is just telling you how you ran AutoSol. Next comes a list of the
values of all the parameters that were used to run AutoSol. It is the
same as the file "autosol.eff" that is written to record these values.
The beginning of this file looks like:

::

    autosol {
      atom_type = "Se"
      lambda = None
      f_prime = None
      f_double_prime = None
      wavelength_name = peak inf high low remote
      sites = 2
      sites_file = None
      seq_file = "sequence.dat"

Here anything that is None was not set. Also anything that has a list of
choices (wavelength\_name in this case) is not set unless a "\*" is next
to one of the choices.

This first set of parameters are all keywords that apply to all datasets
or are shortcuts for setting keywords that apply to a single dataset.
For example "atom\_type=Se" will set the atom\_type for all wavelengths
and all derivatives.

Later in the parameters file comes each wavelength:

::

     wavelength {
        wavelength_name = peak inf high low remote
        data = "high.sca"
        labels = None
        atom_type = None
        lambda = 0.96
        f_prime = -1.5
        f_double_prime = 3
        sites = 2
        sites_file = None
        group = 1
        added_wavelength = False
      }

Here are listed all the values that you have set for this wavelength.
The group is a number you can set to identify what group of
wavelengths/natives/derivatives this wavelength is a part of. That lets
you enter MIR+SAD or any other combinations of datasets. The
"added\_wavelength" keyword is added by the wizard and just marks
whether you specifically added this wavelength or not.

Reading the datafiles.
----------------------

The AutoSol Wizard will read in your datafiles and check their contents,
printing out a summary for each one:

::

    HKLIN ENTRY:  high.sca
    FILE TYPE scalepack_merge
    GUESS FILE TYPE MERGE TYPE sca premerged
    LABELS['IPLUS', 'SIGIPLUS', 'IMINU', 'SIGIMINU']
    Unit cell: (76.08, 27.97, 42.36, 90, 103.2, 90)
    Space group: C 1 2 1 (No. 5)
    CONTENTS: ['high.sca', 'sca', 'premerged', 'C 1 2 1', 
    [76.079999999999998, 27.969999999999999, 42.359999999999999, 90.0, 103.2, 90.0],
    2.5940784397029653, ['IPLUS', 'SIGIPLUS', 'IMINU', 'SIGIMINU']]
    Total of 3 input data files
    ['peak.sca', 'infl.sca', 'high.sca']

Guessing cell contents
----------------------

The AutoSol Wizard uses the sequence information in your sequence file
(**sequence.dat**) and the cell parameters and space group to guess the
number of NCS copies and the solvent fraction, and the number of total
methionines (approximately equal to the number of heavy-atom sites for
SeMet proteins):

::

     
    AutoSol_guess_setup_for_scaling  AutoSol  Run 1 Thu Mar  6 21:43:20 2008
    Solvent fraction and resolution and ha types/scatt fact
    This is the last dataset to scale
    Guessing setup for scaling dataset 1
    SG C 1 2 1
    cell [76.079999999999998, 27.969999999999999, 42.359999999999999, 90.0, 103.2, 90.0]
    Number of residues in unique chains in seq file: 87
    Unit cell: (76.08, 27.97, 42.36, 90, 103.2, 90)
    Space group: C 1 2 1 (No. 5)
    CELL VOLUME :87758.6787391
    N_EQUIV:4
    GUESS OF NCS COPIES: 1
    SOLVENT FRACTION ESTIMATE: 0.46
    Total residues:87
    Total Met:2
    resolution estimate: 2.59

Running phenix.xtriage
----------------------

The AutoSol Wizard automatically runs phenix.xtriage on each of your
input datafiles to analyze them for twinning, outliers, translational
symmetry, and other special conditions that you should be aware of. You
can read more about xtriage in `Data quality assessment with
phenix.xtriage <xtriage.htm>`__. Part of the summary output from xtriage
for this dataset looks like this:

::

     
    The largest off-origin peak in the Patterson function is 12.60% of the
    height of the origin peak. No significant pseudotranslation is detected.

    The results of the L-test indicate that the intensity statistics
    behave as expected. No twinning is suspected.

Testing for anisotropy in the data
----------------------------------

The AutoSol Wizard tests for anisotropy by determining the range of
effective anisotropic B values along the principal lattice directions.
If this range is large and the ratio of the largest to the smallest
value is also large then the data are by default corrected to make the
anisotropy small (see `Analyzing and scaling the
data <autosol.htm#anch26>`__ in the AutoSol web page for more discussion
of the anisotropy correction). In the **gene-5** case, the range of
anisotropic B values is small and no correction is made:

::

    Range of aniso B:  24.58 27.92
    Not using aniso-corrected data files as the range of aniso b  is 
    only  3.43  and 'correct_aniso' is not set

Note that if any one of the datafiles in a MAD dataset has a high
anisotropy, then by default all of them will be corrected for
anisotropy.

Scaling MAD data and estimating FA values
-----------------------------------------

The AutoSol Wizard uses SOLVE localscaling to scale MAD data. The
procedure is basically to scale all the data to the most complete
dataset, ignoring anomalous differences, to create a reference dataset.
Then all F+ and F- observations at all wavelengths are scaled to this
reference dataset, and then the data are merged to the asymmetric unit,
averaging duplicate observations. During this process outliers that
deviate from the reference values by more that **ratio\_out**
(default=1) standard deviations (using all data in the appropriate
resolution shell to estimate the SD) are rejected.

After scaling, the values of **f’** and **f"** are refined based on the
relative values of anomalous differences at the various wavelengths and
the relative values of dispersive differences among the data at
different wavelengths. Then FA values (estimates of the heavy-atom
structure factor) are estimated. These FA values can often be more
useful than the anomalous differences at any of the individual
wavelengths because they combine the anomalous and dispersive
information. At the same time as FA values are calculated, an estimate
of the phase difference between the structure factor of the
anomalously-scattering atoms and the structure factor corresponding to
all other atoms can be estimated. This phase difference is useful later
in calculating Fourier maps showing the positions of the
anomalously-scattering atoms.

Choosing datafiles with high signal-to-noise
--------------------------------------------

For MAD data the AutoSol Wizard analyzes the correlation of anomalous
differences at the various wavelengths. The anomalous difference for a
particular reflection is related to the f" value at each wavelength.
Consequently if the data are good then the anomalous differences at
different wavelengths (but for the same reflections) are highly
correlated. A shell of resolution in which the anomalous differences
have a correlation of about 0.3 or greater has some useful information.
A strong SeMet dataset will have an overall correlation of 0.6-0.7 for
the peak and high energy remote wavelengths. You can see this analysis
in the log file **dataset\_scale\_1.log** for this MAD dataset:

::


    Correlation of anomalous differences at different wavelengths.
    (You should probably cut your data off at the resolution where
     this drops below about 0.3. A good dataset has correlation
     between peak and remote of at least 0.7 overall. Data with
     correlations below about 0.5 probably are not contributing much.)

               CORRELATION FOR
               WAVELENGTH PAIRS
     DMIN    1 VS 2   1 VS 3   2 VS 3

     5.18     0.79     0.89     0.73
     3.88     0.68     0.75     0.55
     3.63     0.68     0.72     0.46
     3.43     0.53     0.61     0.41
     3.24     0.51     0.58     0.26
     3.11     0.51     0.59     0.36
     2.98     0.36     0.54     0.13
     2.85     0.50     0.45     0.35
     2.72     0.28     0.30     0.10
     2.59     0.32     0.23     0.14

     ALL      0.55     0.66     0.40

During scaling, the AutoSol Wizard estimates the signal-to-noise in each
datafile and the resolution where there is significant signal-to-noise
(above 0.3:1 signal-to-noise). In this case, the FA's appear to have the
highest signal-to-noise (3.1) and the inflection data the lowest (0.5):

::

     FILE DATA:FA.sca sn: 3.078877
    FILE DATA:peak.sca sn: 2.313605
    FILE DATA:high.sca sn: 1.365164
    FILE DATA:infl.sca sn: 0.3432194
    order of datasets for trying phasing:['FA.sca', 'peak.sca', 'high.sca', 'infl.sca']

Running HYSS to find the heavy-atom substructure
------------------------------------------------

The HYSS (hybrid substructure search) procedure for heavy-atom searching
uses a combination of a Patterson search for 2-site solutions with
direct methods recycling. The search ends when the same solution is
found beginning with several different starting points. The HYSS log
files are named after the datafile that they are based on and the type
of differences (ano, iso) that are being used. In this **gene-5** MAD
dataset, the HYSS logfile is **peak.sca\_ano\_1.sca\_hyss.log**. The key
part of this HYSS log file is:

::

    Entering search loop:
    p = peaklist index in Patterson map
    f = peaklist index in two-site translation function
    cc = correlation coefficient after extrapolation scan
    r = number of dual-space recycling cycles
    cc = final correlation coefficient

    p=000 f=000 cc=0.144 r=015 cc=0.280 [ best cc: 0.280 ]
    p=000 f=001 cc=0.134 r=015 cc=0.282 [ best cc: 0.282 0.280 ]
    Number of matching sites of top 2 structures: 3
    p=000 f=002 cc=0.100 r=015 cc=0.234 [ best cc: 0.282 0.280 ]
    p=001 f=000 cc=0.181 r=015 cc=0.263 [ best cc: 0.282 0.280 0.263 ]
    Number of matching sites of top 2 structures: 3
    Number of matching sites of top 3 structures: 3
    p=001 f=001 cc=0.146 r=015 cc=0.277 [ best cc: 0.282 0.280 0.277 0.263 ]
    Number of matching sites of top 2 structures: 3
    Number of matching sites of top 3 structures: 3
    Number of matching sites of top 4 structures: 3
    p=001 f=002 cc=0.142 r=015 cc=0.278 [ best cc: 0.282 0.280 0.278 0.277 0.263 ]
    Number of matching sites of top 2 structures: 3
    Number of matching sites of top 3 structures: 3
    Number of matching sites of top 4 structures: 3
    Number of matching sites of top 5 structures: 3

Here a correlation coefficient of 0.5 is very good (0.1 is hopeless, 0.2
is possible, 0.3 is good) and 2 sites were found that matched in the
first two tries. The program continues until 5 structures all have
matching sites, then ends and prints out the final correlations, after
taking the top 2 sites.

Finding the hand and scoring heavy-atom solutions
-------------------------------------------------

Normally either hand of the heavy-atom substructure is a possible
solution, and both must be tested by calculating phases and examining
the electron density map and by carrying out density modification, as
they will give the same statistics for all heavy-atom analysis and
phasing steps. Note that in chiral space groups (those that have a
handedness such as **P61**, both hands of the **space group** must be
tested. The AutoSol Wizard will do this for you, inverting the hand of
the heavy-atom substructure and the space group at the same time. For
example, in space group **P61** the hand of the substructure is inverted
and then it is placed in space group **P65**.

The AutoSol Wizard scores heavy-atom solutions based on two criteria by
default. The first criterion is the skew of the electron density in the
map (**SKEW**). Good values for the skew are anything greater than 0.1.
In a MAD structure determination, the heavy-atom solution with the
correct hand may have a more positive skew than the one with the inverse
hand. The second criterion is the correlation of local RMS density
(**CORR\_RMS**). This is a measure of how contiguous the solvent and
non-solvent regions are in the map. (If the local rms is low at one
point and also low at neighboring points, then the solvent region must
be relatively contiguous, and not split up into small regions.) For MAD
datasets, SOLVE is used for calculating phases. For a MAD dataset, a
figure of merit of 0.5 is acceptable, 0.6 is fine and anything above 0.7
is very good.

The first three solutions scored are all quite good. Here is the first
and best one:

::

    SCORING SOLUTION 1: Solution 1 using HYSS on FA.sca. Dataset #1 SG="C 1 2 1", wi
    th 2 sites
    Number of scoring criteria:  2
    Using BAYES-CC (Bayesian estimate of CC of map to perfect) as scores
    Evaluating solution 1
    FOM found:  0.59
    Number of scoring criteria:  2
    Using BAYES-CC (Bayesian estimate of CC of map to perfect) as scores
    ...
    Scoring for this solution now...

    AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/resolve.scores SKEW 0.2597009
    AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/resolve.scores CORR_RMS 0.8756687

    CC-EST (BAYES-CC) SKEW : 56.1 +/- 18.3
    CC-EST (BAYES-CC) CORR_RMS : 55.7 +/- 36.1
    ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100:  57.9 +/- 14.1

The **ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100** is an estimate of the quality of the
experimental electron density map (not the density-modified one). A set
of real structures was used to calibrate the range of values of each
score that were obtained for phases with varying quality. The resulting
probability distributions are used above to estimate the correlation
between the experimental map and an ideal map for this structure. Then
all the estimates are combined to yield an overall Bayesian estimate of
the map quality. These are reported as CC x 100 +/- 2SD. These estimated
map CC values are usually fairly close, so if the estimate is 57.9 +/-
14.1 then you can be confident that your structure is not only solved
but that you will have a good map when it is density modified.

In this case the datasets used to find heavy-atom substructures were the
FA values in **FA.sca** and the peak data in **peak.sca\_ano\_1.sca**.
For each dataset one solution was found, and that solution and its
inverse were scored. The scores were (skipping extra text below):

::

    SCORING SOLUTION 1: Solution 1 using HYSS on FA.sca. 
    Dataset #1 SG="C 1 2 1", with 2 sites
    ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100:  57.9 +/- 14.1

    SCORING SOLUTION 2: Solution  2 using HYSS on FA.sca and taking inverse. 
    Dataset #1 SG="C 1 2 1", with 2 sites
    ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100:  42.0 +/- 24.3

    SCORING SOLUTION 3: Solution 3 using HYSS on peak.sca_ano_1.sca. 
    Dataset #1 SG="C 1 2 1", with 2 sites
    ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100:  53.2 +/- 16.7

    SCORING SOLUTION 4: Solution  4 using HYSS on peak.sca_ano_1.sca and taking inverse. 
    Dataset #1 SG="C 1 2 1", with 2 sites
    ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100:  53.1 +/- 16.7

In this case the best score was using the FA values and taking the
original hand (ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100: 57.9 +/- 14.1), and score for the
inverted hand of the heavy-atom substructure was worse (ESTIMATED MAP CC
x 100: 42.0 +/- 24.3) and so the hand was clear.

Final phasing with SOLVE
------------------------

Once the best heavy-atom solution or solutions are chosen based on
**ESTIMATED MAP CC**, these are used in a final round of phasing with
SOLVE (for MAD phasing). The log file from phasing for solution **1** is
in **solve\_1.prt**. This SOLVE log file repeats the correlation
analysis of anomalous differences between data at each wavelength. Then
it carries out a detailed refinement of the scattering factors at each
wavelength. Finally the heavy-atom model is refined and phases are
calculated with Bayesian correlated MAD phasing. The final occupancies
and coordinates are listed at the end:

::

                        SITE  ATOM       OCCUP     X       Y       Z         B
     CURRENT VALUES:      1    Se       0.9609  0.4842  0.5199  0.5931   52.0344
     CURRENT VALUES:      2    Se       0.5891  0.4723  0.3052  0.4479   60.0000

In this case the occupancy of one site is quite near 1 and the other is
lower. The second site is a selenomethionine that is not well ordered
(it is the N-terminal residue in the protein).

Statistical density modification with RESOLVE
---------------------------------------------

After MAD phases are calculated with SOLVE, the AutoSol Wizard uses
RESOLVE density modification to improve the quality of the electron
density map. The statistical density modification in RESOLVE takes
advantage of the flatness of the solvent region and the expected
distribution of electron density in the region containing the
macromolecule, as well as any NCS that can be found from the heavy-atom
substructure. The weighted structure factors and phases (FWT, PHWT) from
SOLVE are used to calculate the starting map for RESOLVE, and the
experimental structure factor amplitudes (FP) and MAD
Hendrickson-Lattman coefficients from SOLVE are used in the density
modification process. The output from RESOLVE for solution 1 can be
found in **resolve\_1.log**. Here are key sections of this output.

First, the plot of how many points in the "protein" region of the map
have each possible value of electron density. The plot below is
normalized so that a density of zero is the mean of the solvent region,
and the standard deviation of the density in the map is 1.0. A perfect
map has a lot of points with density slightly less than zero on this
scale (the points between atoms) and a few points with very high density
(the points near atoms), and no points with very negative density. Such
a map has a very high skew (think "skewed off to the right"). This map
is good, with a positive skew, though it is not perfect.

::


     Plot of Observed (o) and model (x) electron density distributions for protein
     region, where the model distribution is given by,
      p_model(beta*(rho+offset)) = p_ideal(rho)
     and then convoluted with a gaussian with width of sigma
     where sigma, offset and beta are given below under "Error estimate."


                              0.03..................................................
                                  .                   .                            .
                                  .                 xx.                            .
                                  .               xxooxx                           .
                                  .              xo   . xx                         .
                                  .             xx    .  xx                        .
                                  .            xo     .    xo                      .
                    p(rho)        .           ox      .     xo                     .
                                  .          xx       .      xo                    .
                                  .          x        .       xxo                  .
                                  .        ox         .         xx                 .
                                  .        xx         .           xx               .
                                  .       xx          .            xxx             .
                                  .    oxx            .              oxxx          .
                                  .  oxx              .                oxxxxx      .
                             0.0  xxxx......................................oxxxxxxx

                                 -2        -1         0         1         2        3

                                      normalized rho (0 = mean of solvent region)
     -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

After density modification is complete, this plot becomes much more like
one from a perfect structure:

::


                              0.03..................................................
                                  .                   .                            .
                                  .                   .                            .
                                  .             xxxxoo.                            .
                                  .            xxoooxx.                            .
                                  .          xxo      xoo                          .
                                  .          oo       .xxo                         .
                    p(rho)        .         x         .  x                         .
                                  .        x          .   xx                       .
                                  .      ox           .    oxxx                    .
                                  .     ox            .      oxxxx                 .
                                  .    xx             .         ooxxxxxx           .
                                  .   ox              .              oooxxxxxx     .
                                  . oxx               .                   o oxxxxxx.
                                  xxxx                .                           xo
                             0.0  x................................................x

                                 -2        -1         0         1         2        3

                                      normalized rho (0 = mean of solvent region)
     -------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The key statistic from this RESOLVE density modification is the R-factor
for comparison of observed structure factor amplitudes (FP) with those
calculated from the density modification procedure (FC). In this
**gene-5** MAD phasing the R-factor is very low:

::

     Overall R-factor for FC vs FP: 0.284 for       2669 reflections

An acceptable value is anything below 0.35; below 0.30 is good.

Generation of FreeR flags
-------------------------

The AutoSol Wizard will create a set of free R flags indicating which
reflections are not to be used in refinement. By default 5% of
reflections (up to a maximum of 2000) are reserved for this test set. If
you want to supply a reflection file **hires.mtz** that has higher
resolution than the data used to solve the structure, or has a test set
already marked, then you can do this with the keyword
**input\_refinement\_file=hires.mtz**. The files to be used for
model-building and refinement are listed in the AutoSol log file:

::

     
    Copying  AutoSol_run_1_/solve_1.mtz  and adding free R flags for refinement
    input_data_file_use:  AutoSol_run_1_/solve_1.mtz
    labin_use:  labin FP=FP SIGFP=SIGFP PHIB=PHIB FOM=FOM HLA=HLA HLB=HLB HLC=HLC HLD=HLD
    Adding FreeR_flag to  AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/solve_1.mtz
    ...
    THE FILE AutoSol_run_1_/resolve_1.mtz will be used for model-building
    THE FILE exptl_fobs_phases_freeR_flags_1.mtz will be used for refinement

Model-building with RESOLVE
---------------------------

The AutoSol Wizard by default uses a very quick method to build just the
secondary structure of your macromolecule. This is controlled by the
keywords **helices\_strands\_only=True** and
**helices\_strands\_start=True**. If you set
**helices\_strands\_only=True** then only secondary structure will be
built. If you instead set **helices\_strands\_start=True** then a
secondary-structure model will be built and then it will be extended
with standard RESOLVE model-building. The Wizard will guess from your
sequence file whether the structure is protein or RNA or DNA (but you
can tell it if you want with (**chain\_type=PROTEIN**).

If the quick model-building does not build a satisfactory model (if the
correlation of map and model is less than
**acceptable\_secondary\_structure\_cc=0.35**), then model-building is
tried again with the standard build procedure, essentially the same as
one cycle of model-building with the AutoBuild Wizard (see the web page
`Automated Model Building and Rebuilding with
AutoBuild <autobuild.htm>`__, except that if you specify
**thoroughness=quick** as we have in this example, the model-building is
done less comprehensively to speed things up.

In this case the secondary-structure-only model-building produces an
initial model with 38 residues built and side chains assigned to 0, and
which has a model-map correlation of 0.40

::

    Secondary-structure model:  AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/Build_1.pdb
    Log file:  Build_1.log  copied to  Build_1.log
    Models to combine and extend:  ['Build_1.pdb']
    Using CC to score in combine_extend
    Model 2: Residues built=38  placed=0  Chains=5  Model-map CC=0.40 (Build_combine
    _extend_2.pdb)
    This is new best model with cc =  0.4
    Refining model:  Build_combine_extend_2.pdb
    Model: AutoSol_run_1_/TEMP0/refine_2.pdb  R/Rfree=0.50/0.50

After several cycles of model completion, the model-map correlation is
now reasonably good (0.63), the model-building is considered successful
and the refined initial model is written out to **refine\_12.pdb** in
the output directory. It is still just a preliminary model, but it is
good enough to tell that the structure is solved. For full
model-building you will want to go on and use the AutoBuild Wizard (see
the web page `Automated Model Building and Rebuilding with
AutoBuild <autobuild.htm>`__ )

The AutoSol\_summary.dat summary file
-------------------------------------

A quick summary of the results of your AutoSol run is in the
**AutoSol\_summary.dat** file in your output directory. This file lists
the key files that were produced in your run of AutoSol (all these are
in the output directory) and some of the key statistics for the run,
including the scores for the heavy-atom substructure and the
model-building and refinement statistics. These statistics are listed
for all the solutions obtained, with the highest-scoring solutions
first. Here is part of the summary for this **gene-5** MAD dataset:

::

     
    ----------CURRENT SOLUTIONS FOR RUN 1 : -------------------
     *** FILES ARE IN THE DIRECTORY: AutoSol_run_1_ ****

    Solution # 1  BAYES-CC: 57.9 +/- 14.1 Dataset #1   FOM: 0.5

    Solution 1 using HYSS on FA.sca. Dataset #1 SG="C 1 2 1"
    Dataset number: 1
    Dataset type: mad
    Datafiles used: ['high.sca', 'peak.sca', 'infl.sca']
    Sites: 2 (Already used for Phasing at resol of 2.6)
    NCS information  in: AutoSol_1.ncs_spec
    Experimental phases in: solve_1.mtz
    Experimental phases plus FreeR_flags for refinement in: 
       exptl_fobs_phases_freeR_flags_1.mtz
    Density-modified phases in: resolve_1.mtz
    HA sites (PDB format) in: ha_1.pdb_formatted.pdb
    Sequence file in: sequence.dat
    Model in: refine_12.pdb
      Residues built: 65
      Side-chains built: 10
      Chains: 6
      Overall model-map correlation: 0.63
      R/R-free: 0.42/0.48
    Scaling logfile in: dataset_1_scale.log
    HYSS logfile in: FA.sca_hyss.log
    Phasing logfile in: solve_1.prt
    Density modification logfile in: resolve_1.log (R=0.28)
    Build logfile in: Build_combine_extend_12.log

     Score type:       SKEW    CORR_RMS
    Raw scores:        0.26      0.88
    100x EST OF CC:   56.10     55.69

    Heavy atom sites (fractional):
    xyz       0.486     -0.480      0.592
    xyz       0.473      0.324      0.450

How do I know if I have a good solution?
----------------------------------------

Here are some of the things to look for to tell if you have obtained a
correct solution:

-  How much of the model was built? More than 50% is good, particularly
   if you are using the default of helices\_strands\_only=True. If less
   than 25% of the model is built, then it may be entirely incorrect.
   Have a look at the model. If you see clear sets of parallel or
   antiparallel strands, or if you see helices and strands with the
   expected relationships, your model is going to be correct. If you see
   a lot of short fragments everywhere, your model and solution is going
   to be incorrect. How many side-chains were fitted to density? More
   than 25% is ok, more than 50% is very good.
-  What is the R-factor of the model? This only applies if you are
   building a full model (not for helices\_strands\_only=True). For a
   solution at moderate to high resolution (2.5 A or better) the
   R-factor should be in the low 30's to be very good. For
   lower-resolution data, an R-factor in the low 40's is probably
   largely correct but the model is not very good.
-  What was the overall signal-to-noise in the data? Above 1 is good,
   below 0.5 is very low.
-  What are the individual CC-BAYES estimates of map correlation for
   your top solution? For a good solution they are all around 50 or
   more, with 2SD uncertainties that are about 10-20.
-  What is the overall "ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100" of your top solution.
   This should also be 50 or more for a good solution. This is an
   estimate of the map correlation before density modification, so if
   you have a lot of solvent or several NCS-related copies in the
   asymmetric unit, then lower values may still give you a good map.
-  What is the difference in "ESTIMATED MAP CC x 100" between the top
   solution and its inverse? If this is large (more than the 2SD values
   for each) that is a good sign.

What to do next
---------------

Once you have run AutoSol and have obtained a good solution and model,
the next thing to do is to run the AutoBuild Wizard. If you run it in
the same directory where you ran AutoSol, the AutoBuild Wizard will pick
up where the AutoSol Wizard left off and carry out iterative
model-building, density modification and refinement to improve your
model and map. See the web page `Automated Model Building and Rebuilding
with AutoBuild <autobuild.htm>`__ for details on how to run AutoBuild.

If you do not obtain a good solution, then it's not time to give up yet.
There are a number of standard things to try that may improve the
structure determination. Here are a few that you should always try:

-  Try setting thoroughness=thorough if it had previously been set to
   quick. This can make a big difference, though it takes longer.
-  Try setting max\_choices to a larger number, or desired\_coverage to
   a higher value.
-  Have a careful look at all the output files. Work your way through
   the main log file (e.g., **AutoSol\_run\_1\_1.log**) and all the
   other principal log files in order beginning with scaling
   (**dataset\_1\_scale.log**), then looking at heavy-atom searching
   (**FA.sca\_hyss.log**), phasing (e.g., **solve\_10.log** or
   **solve\_xx.log** depending on which solution **xx** was the top
   solution) and density modification (e.g., **resolve\_xx.log**). Is
   there anything strange or unusual in any of them that may give you a
   clue as to what to try next? For example did the phasing work well
   (high figure of merit) yet the density modification failed? (Perhaps
   the hand is incorrect). Was the solvent content estimated correctly?
   (You can specify it yourself if you want). What does the xtriage
   output say? Is there twinning or strong translational symmetry? Are
   there problems with reflections near ice rings? Are there many
   outlier reflections?
-  Try a different resolution cutoff. For example 0.5 A lower resolution
   than you tried before. Often the highest-resolution shells have
   little useful information for structure solution (though the data may
   be useful in refinement and density modification).
-  Try a different rejection criterion for outliers. The default is
   **ratio\_out=10.0** (toss reflections with delta F more than 10 times
   the rms delta F of all reflections in the shell). Try instead
   **ratio\_out=3** to toss outliers.
-  If the heavy-atom substructure search did not yield plausible
   solutions, try searching with HYSS using the command-line interface,
   and vary the resolution and number of sites you look for. Can you
   find a solution that has a higher **CC** than the one found in
   AutoSol? If so, you can read your solution in to AutoSol with
   **sites\_file=my\_sites.pdb**.
-  Was an anisotropy correction applied in AutoSol? If there is some
   anisotropy but no correction was applied, you can force AutoSol to
   apply the correction with **correct\_aniso=True**.
-  Try related space groups. If you are not positive that your space
   group is P212121, then try other possibilities with different or no
   screw axes.

Additional information
----------------------

For details about the AutoSol Wizard, see `Automated structure solution
with AutoSol <autosol.htm>`__. For help on running Wizards, see `Using
the PHENIX Wizards <running-wizards.htm>`__.
