What is PHENIX
==============

The PHENIX software suite is a highly automated system for
macromolecular structure determination that can rapidly arrive at an
initial partial model of a structure without significant human
intervention, given moderate resolution and good quality data. This
achievement has been made possible by the development of new algorithms
for structure determination, maximum-likelihood molecular replacement
(PHASER), heavy-atom search (HySS), template and pattern-based automated
model-building (RESOLVE), automated macromolecular refinement
(phenix.refine), and iterative model-building, density modification and
refinement that can operate at moderate resolution (RESOLVE, AutoBuild).
These algorithms are based on a highly integrated and comprehensive set
of crystallographic libraries that have been built and made available to
the community. The algorithms are tightly linked and made easily
accessible to users through the PHENIX Wizards and the command line.

There are also a number of tools in PHENIX for handling ligands.
Automated fitting of ligands into the electron density is facilitated
via the LigandFit wizard. Besides being able to fit a known ligand into
a difference map, the LigandFit wizard is capable to identify ligands on
the basis of the difference density only. Stereo chemical dictionaries
of ligands whose chemical description is not available in the supplied
monomer library for the use in restrained macromolecular refinement can
be generated with the electronic ligand builder and optimization
workbench (eLBOW).

PHENIX builds upon Python, the Boost.Python Library, and C++ to provide
an environment for automation and scientific computing. Many of the
fundamental crystallographic building blocks, such as data objects and
tools for their manipulation are provided by the Computational
Crystallography Toolbox (cctbx). The computational tasks which perform
complex crystallographic calculations are then built on top of this.
Finally, there are a number of different user interfaces available in
PHENIX. In order to facilitate automated operation there is the Project
Data Storage (PDS) that is used to store and track the results of
calculations.

The PHENIX development team consists of members from Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory (Paul Adams's group), Los Alamos National Laboratory (Tom
Terwilliger's group), Cambridge University (Randy Read's group) and Duke
University (the Richardsons' group). Researchers from Texas A&M
University (Tom Ioerger's and Jim Sacchettini's groups) participated in
the first five years of PHENIX development.

The development of PHENIX is funded by the National Institutes of Health
(General Medicine) under grant P01GM063210, and the PHENIX Industrial
Consortium.

Citing PHENIX

If you use PHENIX to solve a structure please cite this publication:

Macromolecular structure determination using X-rays, neutrons and electrons: recent developments in Phenix.
D. Liebschner, P. V. Afonine, M. L. Baker, G. Bunk√≥czi, V. B. Chen,
T. I. Croll, B. Hintze, L.-W. Hung, S. Jain, A. J. McCoy, N. W. Moriarty,
R. D. Oeffner, B. K. Poon, M. G. Prisant, R. J. Read, J. S. Richardson,
D. C. Richardson, M. D. Sammito, O. V. Sobolev, D. H. Stockwell,
T. C. Terwilliger, A. G. Urzhumtsev, L. L. Videau, C. J. Williams
and P. D. Adams.
Acta Cryst. (2019). D75, 861-877

Publications

A number of publications describing PHENIX can be found at:

`http://www.phenix-online.org/papers/ <http://www.phenix-online.org/papers/>`__
