Cutting density out of a map with cut\_out\_density
===================================================

Author(s)
---------

-  cut\_out\_density: Tom Terwilliger

Purpose
-------

This routine cuts density out of a map and writes an MTZ file in space
group P1 with map coefficients for the cutout density. The density map
is calculated from map coefficients supplied as an input MTZ file. The
region to be cut out is specified through the center of the region and
dimensions in X Y and Z of a box to be cut out (cutout\_center=X,Y,Z and
cutout\_dimensions=a,b,c). Alternatively the region can be specified
with a PDB file and optional atom selections, with all points within a
specified radius of an atom included, or the region can be specified
with a center and the radius of a sphere to include. The density in the
region cut out can optionally be offset to have a mean density of zero.
The region outside the cut out region always will have a density of
zero. The cut out region can be optionally padded with flat density an
additional distance beyond the box that is cut out (padding=xx). The
resolution of the cutout map can also be specified (the input map will
be truncated at the high-resolution limit specified, and the output map
will extend to the high-resolution limit.)

Usage
-----

The main uses of phenix.cut\_out\_density are:

-  Cutting out a small part of a map and molecule to work on
   independently of the rest of the structure. This can be useful if you
   have a very large structure, as working with a small piece may be
   much quicker. Note that you can only carry out real-space methods on
   the extracted map and model.
-  Cutting density out of a map to use in molecular replacement. In this
   case it is easiest to use the keyword "for_phaser=True" to make a file
   suitable for use in Phaser.

Please note: you should not use phenix.cut\_out\_density to select
regions near your model for display purposes. You can create a highly
misleading map by displaying only density that is within a small radius
of atoms in your model.

How cut\_out\_density works:
----------------------------

cut\_out\_density assumes that you are supplying map coefficients and
calculates a map. Then it creates a new unit cell in space group P1 with
orthogonal axes and dimensions big enough for your cut out region and
padding of zero density around it. The density in your map at the center
you specify is then centered at the origin in the new map. Then new map
coefficients are created and written out.

You can optionally specify the region to be cut out as a box, a sphere,
or a region defined by all points within a specified distance of atoms
in a PDB file.

You can specify the center of the region to be cut out with its
coordinates, or as the centroid of a PDB file that is input.

If you specify an input PDB file, you can use a selection string to
select any part of that model (i.e., one domain or one chain) as the
region to be cut out or as the center of the cut out region.

If you specify an input PDB file, then the selected atoms from that file
will be offset to match the new map and written out.

As a convenience, you can re-transform a PDB file back to the original
position in your original model as well.

*Output files from cut\_out\_density*
-------------------------------------

**cutout.mtz**: An MTZ file with your cut out density in space group P1.

**cutout.pdb**: A PDB file with your input molecule translated to match
the offset used in creating cutout.mtz

Examples
--------

**Standard run of cut\_out\_density:**

Running cut\_out\_density is easy. From the command-line you can type:

::

    phenix.cut_out_density model.pdb map_coeffs.mtz

**Preparing density for molecular replacement in Phaser:**

The for_phaser=True keyword sets most of the defaults appropriately.
You have to provide a PDB file with atoms defining the centers of spheres
around which the density should be cut out.  Set the cutout_model_radius
parameter to define the size of the spheres.  If you have a reasonably
detailed atomic model, a value of 3. may be appropriate, but you may
have a PDB file specifying one big sphere as in this command:

::

    phenix.cut_out_density for_phaser=True cutout_model_radius=15 sphere.pdb map_coeffs.mtz
