Build water into cryo-EM map using phenix.douse
===============================================

`phenix.douse` is a tool to build water into cryo-EM maps.

Facts about the procedure
-------------------------

1) The water is built into density map also ensuring each water is linked to the 
protein via H-bond, directly or indirectly (via another water).

2) Atomic model of the macro-molecule is assumed to be as complete and accurate 
as possible (for example, B factors are refined individually).

3) Water is looked for in a band of 6A width extending out from the protein 
surface. This allows to build about two solvation layers around protein. Any 
unmodeled density in this region is treated as potential water.

4) Minimal (dist_min) and maximal (dist_max) distances between any water and 
protein or other water are 2 and 3.2A, correspondingly.

5) Not all protein atoms are used to assess contacts with prospective water 
molecules but only those that can participate in H-bonds. These atoms are 
additionally filtered to leave a subset of atoms that are confidently placed in 
the map. The confidence is quantified by CCmask 
(cc_mask_threshold_interacting_atoms) - the correlation between model-calculated 
and experimental maps for the atom in question. The default is set to 0.5. 
The CCmask is calculated in a sphere of 2A radius (atom_radius) around the atom 
in question.

6) Only strong enough density peaks are considered as potential water-candidates. 
"Strong enough" is defined as the average of map density values interpolated at 
atomic centers of protein atoms times the attenuation scale factor 
map_threshold_scale which is set to 0.25 by default.

7) The remaining peaks are filtered by two additional 
criteria.

One is CCmask (cc_mask_filter) with the cutoff value of 0.5 
(cc_mask_filter_threshold). The CCmask is calculated similarly to "5)". Since 
CCmask strongly depends on atomic B factors and B factors of newly placed 
water-candidates are not known, unrestrained isotropic B factor refinement is 
performed for newly placed water prior to CCmask calculation.

Another selection criterion is peak sphericity (scc). The peak sphericity is 
evaluated as minimal correlation between any combination of two sets of map 
values interpolated along vectors going out from the peak center and having 
length of 1A. For a perfectly spherical peak the correlation between any 
"pair of vectors" (any pair of sets of map values along these vectors) must be 1. 
The water is rejected if scc is less than 0.5.

Comments
--------

1) Geometric (water-protein or water-water distance) and chemical (types of 
interacting atoms) criteria are rather strong and rigid criteria and do not allow 
much room for variation. The set default values are taken from standard literature.

2) Map-based criteria, such as various correlations, are more heuristics and 
rule-of-thumb based. For correlations, 1 means perfect similarity, 0 is no 
similarity and -1 is anti-similarity. So a choice like 0.5 means some similarity, 
half-way between none and perfect. Choosing a larger value will mean choosing 
more confident waters.

3) Map sphericity reflects the observation that water density appears to be 
approximately spherical most of the time. This observation breaks down in a 
number of special cases that need a special treatment and that can be a subject 
of future improvement of the tool. For example, at high resolution water with 
high directional mobility typically yield elliptical peak shapes. Water 
coordinated by heavier ions may not even resolved as individual peak or even if 
resolved as individual peak its spehricity can be largely perturbed.

4) Peak height threshold for selecting peak candidates is another rather ad-hoc 
criterion. It uses peak heights of confidently placed protein atoms as a guide. 
However, since water molecules are more mobile and often partially occupied, 
their peaks are expected to be weaker than peaks of better resolved protein atoms. 
By how much weaker? That is unknown. Thus some arbitrary attenuation scale is used.

5) Building 'single-atom' entities, such as water or ions, is a much more 
difficult task to do compared to building more feature-rich molecules such as 
proteins or multi-atom ligands. This is because it is much easier to confuse a 
true peak with a noise peak, while a constellation of many peaks (corresponding 
to protein chain, for example) contains very important information about shape 
and connectivity, making interpretation such peaks in terms of atomic model easier. 
Therefore, water building procedure is unlikely to be ever fully automated.

Availability
------------

Command line, GUI.

Required inputs
---------------

Atomic model (PDB or mmCIF format) and map (MRC format).

`resolution` is required if `cc_mask_filter` is set to True.

Optional inputs
---------------

`mode = whole` or `per_chain`: work on the whole model or per chain. Working on 
the whole model may require a lot of memory.

`sphericity_filter = True`: use peak sphericity criteria. Disable to add more water.

`scc = 0.5`: map peak sphericity characteristic. Decrease to add more water.

`keep_input_water = False`: keep or remove existing water.

`dist_min = 2.0`: minimal peak-peak or peak-atom distance. Decrease to add more water.

`dist_max = 3.2`: maximal peak-peak or peak-atom distance. Increase to add more water.

`step = 0.3`: map re-sampling step.

`map_threshold_scale = 0.5`: map threshold for peak selection = (mean map value 
at atom centers) * map_threshold_scale
Decrease to add more water.

`cc_mask_filter = True`: reject water with CC_mask < cc_mask_filter_threshold.

`cc_mask_filter_threshold = 0.5`: CC_mask threshold for rejecting water.

`resolution`: map resolution. Required if cc_mask_filter=True

Limitations
-----------

P1 symmetry is the only supported symmetry.

Assumptions
-----------

Macromolecular part of the atomic model is as compltete as possible (no missing
chains or other unmodelled parts present). The model is fully refined including 
individual B-factors.

Map resolution is sufficently high to expect water oxygens be visible in the map.

Example
-------

   phenix.douse model.pdb map.mrc resolution=2.5
   
`resolution` is required if `cc_mask_filter` is set to True.

More information
----------------

`<https://phenix-online.org/phenixwebsite_static/mainsite/files/presentations/water.pdf>`_

This document reflects the procedure at the time of making the document. The 
procedure in most current version of Phenix can be (slightly) different.

Author
------

Pavel Afonine (PAfonine@lbl.gov)
