Correlation of map and model after adjusting model for origin shifts with get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb
===========================================================================================

Author(s)
---------

-  get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb: Tom Terwilliger

Purpose
-------

get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb is a command line tool for adjusting the origin of a
PDB file using space-group symmetry so that the PDB file superimposes on
a map, obtaining the correlation of model and map, and analyzing the
correlation for each residue.

Usage
-----

How get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb works:
----------------------------

get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb calculates a model map based on the supplied PDB file,
then uses RESOLVE to find the origin shift (using space-group symmetry)
that maximizes the correlation of this model map with a map calculated
with the supplied map coefficients in an mtz file. This shift is applied
to the atoms in the PDB file to create **offset.pdb** and then the
correlation, residue-by-residue of **offset.pdb** with the map is
analyzed. Atoms and residues that are out of density or are in weak
density are flagged.

You can set several parameters to define how the correlations are
calculated.

By default model density is calculated using the atom types, occupancies
and isotropic thermal factors (B-values) supplied in the PDB file. If
you specify

::

    scale=True

then an overall B as well as an increment in B-values for each atom
beyond CB (for proteins) will be added to the values in the PDB file,
after adjusting these parameters to maximize the map correlation.

If you specify

::

    use_only_refl_present_in_mtz=True

then the model-based map will be calculated using the same set of
reflections as the map calculated from your input mtz file. This reduces
the contribution of missing reflections on the calculation (but the
correlation is no longer the actual map-model correlation).

In the calculation of the map correlation in the region of the model,
the region where the model is located is defined as all points within a
distance rad\_max of an atom in the model. The value of rad\_max is
adjusted in each case to maximize this correlation. Its value is
typically similar to the high-resolution limit of the map.

*Output files from get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb*
-------------------------------------

**offset.pdb**: A PDB file offset to match the origin in the mtz file.

Examples
--------

Standard run of get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb:
----------------------------------

Running the get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb is easy. From the command-line you can
type:

::

    phenix.get_cc_mtz_pdb map_coeffs.mtz coords.pdb

If you want (or need) to specify the column names from your mtz file,
you will need to tell get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb what FP and PHIB (and optionally
FOM) are, in this format:

::

    phenix.get_cc_mtz_pdb map_coeffs.mtz coords.pdb \
    labin="FP=2FOFCWT PHIB=PH2FOFCWT"

Possible Problems
-----------------

Specific limitations and problems:
----------------------------------

The option to use atom selections in get\_cc\_mtz\_pdb can cause some
confusion, because the CC values obtained can depend on the atom
selections. The way this works is that the PDB file (after atom
selections) is used to calculate model density. This model density is
compared to the map from your input map coefficients in the region
surrounding the atoms selected. This model density can depend on the
presence of nearby atoms (where the density extends a ways away from
those atoms).

In versions of PHENIX up to 1.3-final, defaults were set to maximize the
correlation coefficient rather than to give the correlation using the
existing thermal parameters and including only the reflections present
in the mtz file. These previous defaults were equivalent to using the
values:

::

    scale=True
    use_only_refl_present_in_mtz=True

These defaults were changed so that the correlation values obtained by
default in a case where no origin shifts are needed would correspond to
those obtained by simply calculating (1) a map using the input map
coefficients and (2) a map from the PBB file and then determining the
correlation between these maps.
