=========================
Guided Ligand Replacement
=========================

.. contents::

Authors: Nigel W. Moriarty and Herbert E. Klei

Overview
--------

The Guided Ligand Replacement (GLR) module is intended to facilitate
ligand placement when the X-ray crystal structure of at least one
similar protein:ligand complex is known.  GLR is often employed in
structure-assisted drug design where the structures of many related
protein:inhibitor complexes are determined.  It is especially useful
for complicated ligands and when there are multiple independent copies
in the asymmetric unit.

The Guided Ligand Replacement (GLR) tool is designed to use prior
knowledge from a previously fit ligand to expedite the fitting of a
"similar" ligand into the same or "similar" protein. The similarity
required between the pair of ligands can be as little as a few atoms.

The proteins are overlayed using ``phenix.superpose_pdbs``. The
ligands are matched using the electronic Ligand Builder and
Optimization Workbench (eLBOW) via another tool called
``phenix.superpose_ligands``.  Once the ligand has been fit, a
Real-Space Refinement (RSR) is performed and the final model written
to disk.

Usage
-----

Usage ::

  phenix.guided_ligand_replacement [options] \
    target_pdb_file_name=structure-in-which-target-ligand-is-to-be-placed.pdb \
    ligand_cif_file_name=parameterization-of-target-ligand.cif \
    map_coeffs_file_name=map-coefficients-for-target-electron-density.mtz \
    guide_pdb_file_name=structure-of-reference-protein-ligand-complex.pdb \
    ligand_selection_in_guide_model=selection-to-identify-reference-ligand \
    replace_ligand_in_guide_pdb_file_name=[true|false]

.. _input-files:

Input files
-----------

GLR requires a number of inputs and also has some options, all of
which are provided using the ``phil`` formalism. The list of inputs:

  - **guide_pdb_file_name**: Name of the PDB file for the structure of
    the reference protein:ligand complex.  While the protein used in
    the target and reference structures is usually the same, the
    protein sequences need only be sufficiently similar to reliably
    superimpose.

  - **protein_pdb_file_name**: Name of PDB file in which the target
    (i.e. new) ligand is to be placed.  This structure is typically
    the apo structure from molecular replacement after one round of
    refinement.

  - **map_coeffs_file_name**: Name of the map coefficient file for the
    electron density in which the target ligand is to be placed.
    This file is typically the MTZ file from latest run of
    *phenix.refine*.  If this file contains more than one set of
    possible map coefficients, the first recognized set is used.
    If structure factors are provided (e.g. MTZ file with only FOBS
    and SIGFOBS), the 2Fo-Fc map is calculated and used.  Map files
    (e.g. .map) are used directly.

The input for the ligand can be any input file that is readable by
eLBOW.  Either or both of the following phil parameters can be used.

  - **ligand_input_file_name**: this is a file containing chemical
    information about the ligand.

  - **ligand_cif_file_name**: this is the of a ligand restraints file
    for the RSR step. If not supplied, the restraints are generated
    from **ligand_input_file_name**.

  - **ligand_code**: the ligand code from the PDB Chemical Components
    so that restraints and geometry can be generated.

Optional inputs include:

  - **ligand_selection_in_guide_model**: Standard PHENIX selection
    expression to identify the reference ligand in the reference
    structure.  A typical selection might look like "resname LG1 and
    resid 1".  While GLR tries to make a sensible selection based on
    ligand code or uniqueness, it may be necessary to make an explicit
    selection.

  - **replace_ligand_in_guide_pdb_file_name=[true|false]**: By
    default, this parameter is set to false and can be omitted.  If
    this parameter is set to true, the reference structure is also
    used as the target structure (protein_pdb_file_name parameter is
    ignored).  This functionality is useful in two circumstances::

      1) the first copy of the ligand is placed manually and it needs
      to be propagated throughout the asymmetric unit

      2) the current ligand is incorrect (e.g. GTP instead of ATP) or
      needs to be updated (e.g. remove non-standard atom names).

  - **phenix.superpose_pdbs**: this allows selection of the same
    parameters as in the standalone program.

Output files
------------

By default, GLR will generate a PDB file with the fit ligand.

Examples
--------

Example 1
+++++++++

The reference FXa structure, 3KQE, and its reference ligand, LGM, is
used to place the target ligand, LGK, in the target FXa structure 3KQC
::

  phenix.guided_ligand_replacement \
    target_pdb_file_name=3KQC-apo.pdb \
    ligand_cif_file_name=LGK.cif \
    map_coeffs_file_name=refine-apo.mtz \
    guide_pdb_file_name=3KQE.pdb \
    ligand_selection_in_guide_model="resname LGM"

.. Example 2A
   ++++++++++

.. A manually placed copy of the ligand, XXX is propagated throughout the
   asymmetric unit of YYYY.

.. Example 2B
   ++++++++++

.. Staged example in which GMP-PNP was initially replaced with AMP-PNP in
   4L9W.  This same approach could be used to replace ligands with
   non-standard nomenclature (e.g. atom names).

Example 3
+++++++++

In all of the above examples, the input can be provided through a PHIL
file.  ::

  phenix.guided_ligand_replacement < glr.phil > glr.log

References
----------

{{citation:glr}}

{{citation:elbow}}


List of all available keywords
------------------------------

{{phil:phenix.command_line.guided_ligand_replacement}}
