*ReadySet!*
===========

*ReadySet!*
===========

Author
------

Nigel W. Moriarty

Purpose
-------

*ReadySet!* is a program designed to prepare a PDB file for refinement
as in *ReadySet! Refine!!!*. It will add hydrogens to the protein model
using phenix.reduce and to the ligands using eLBOW. The appropriate
restraints are also written to disk. Hydrogens can also be added to
water molecules. Deuterium atoms can be added to facilitate dual
xray-neutron refinement. Metal coordination files are also generated.

General Procedure
-----------------

Ligand hydrogen addition
------------------------

Including hydrogens in a refinement leads to better models. *ReadySet!*
will add hydrogens to the ligands using eLBOW and PDB Chemical
Components. The input PDB file is divided into 'standard' residues
including the standard aminoacids and RNA/DNA bases. The other residues
(usually ligands) are tested using the three-letter and atomic names
against the PHENIX monomer library and the PDB Chemical Components
database.

If the ligand is determined to be in the PHENIX monomer library then the
hydrogens are added with the atom naming from the library. This is done
using a SMILES string taken from the PDB Chemical Components database
and the atom names from the monomer library. In this case, the hydrogens
are added to the output PDB file but there is no restraints written
because phenix.refine will use the library restraints.

If the ligand is determined to be in the PDB Chemical Components
database, the SMILES string and the atom names are used to generate a
molecule that represents the ligand. The atomic naming is determined
using either the version 2 or version 3 PDB names. The restraints are
written to disk.

If no match is found in the PHENIX monomer library or PDB Chemical
Components database, the residue atoms are used to generate the ligand.
The restraints are written to disk.

Once there is a ligand representation including hydrogens, the ligand
must be included in the output. For each copy of the ligand in the model
the presentation is pruned to match the number of non-hydrogen atoms and
overlayed onto the ligand orientation. Hydrogens are added in an
optimised geometry for each copy of the ligand.

Covalently bound ligands are handled and two files, the CIF link
restraints file and the atom selection file, are output.

Metal coordination
------------------

Any metals in the model are coordinated and the results output in an
"edits" for phenix.refine. The distances and angles in the PDB file are
used in the output.

Neutron exchange addition
-------------------------

Deuteriums are added to aminoacids that exhibit exchangeable sites. The
hydrogens are placed in alternative location "A" and the corresponding
deuteriums are placed in "B".

{{phil:elbow.command_line.ready_set}}
