Secondary structure restraints
==============================

.. |br| raw:: html

   <br /><br />

Refinement may be stabilized by addition of hydrogen-bond restraints to
maintain (or idealize) secondary structure.  This is particularly important
at low resolution, where the protein geometry should be kept as precise as
possible to avoid overfitting, but it appears to help even at moderate
resolutions (up to 2.0 A, maybe further).  Applying these restraints
usually improves R-free by up to 0.005, and often keeps R-work and R-free
from diverging as much as they might otherwise.  (Note that this is not
always true, and depends strongly on the weighting and outlier filtering;
for this reason, we recommend experimenting with this setting to see whether
and how it helps your structure, rather than blindly enabling this feature.)

General description
-------------------

To activate secondary structure restraints in phenix.refine, simply add the
parameter ``secondary_structure.enabled=True`` on the command line,
or check the box labeled "Secondary structure restraints" in the configuration
window of the phenix.refine GUI.  Assignment of atom selections will be fully
automatic.  We recommend using explicit hydrogens in refinement, but
hydrogen bonds will be specified between heavy atoms anyway.


Proteins
--------

Hydrogen bond lengths for protein secondary structure are restrained at 2.9A
with sigma 0.05A for N-O.  Outliers (defined as N-O bonds greater than 3.5A)
will be automatically removed, but you may prevent this with
``secondary_structure.protein.remove_outliers=False``.  This may be helpful
for very poor low-resolution structures, e.g. to force proper structure on a
manually built helix, but it will also cause completely spurious bond
restraints to be overlooked.

Annotation of secondary structure is performed by KSDSSP, an open-source
implementation by UCSF's Computer Graphics Laboratory (authors of the
molecular graphics program Chimera) of the original DSSP algorithm (Kabsch
and Sander 1983).  Users may also provide their own annotation in the form
of HELIX and SHEET records from the PDB; however, because this format is
difficult to use, we recommend using the configuration syntax used in
phenix.refine, and/or visually editing the secondary structure in the PHENIX
GUI (both described below).

The PDB format supports 10 different types of helix, but only three of these
(alpha, pi, and 3_10) are common in naturally occurring proteins and have
easily deciphered hydrogen-bonding rules.  User-specified helices default to
alpha form (hydrogen bonds between residue n and residue n+4).  Sheets may
be either parallel or antiparallel.  Because additional details are required
to establish the hydrogen bonding pattern, we do not recommend defining
sheets manually unless you are certain you know what to do.  Future versions
will include a more intelligent editor to assist in annotation.

Nucleic acids
-------------

Hydrogen bonding and stacking interactions stablilize structure of nucleic
acids. Restraints include base-pairing restraints (hydrogen bonding and
keeping basepairs in plane) and stacking restraints to keep stacked bases
parallel to each other. These restraints are turned on with the main switch
``secondary_structure.enabled=True``. They could be turned off individually:
``secondary_structure.nucleic_acid.enabled=False``. Annotation is performed
automatically or could be supplied in parameter file.


Graphical editor
----------------

Documentation coming soon!

Configuration syntax
--------------------

Limitations
-----------

  - Only bond length is restrained in proteins, angles may move freely.

  - The distribution of oxygen-nitrogen distances in beta sheets appears to be
    very slightly bimodal, probably due to the difference in geometry between
    parallel and antiparallel sheets.  Increasing the slack may compensate for
    this, but it isn't clear whether this is necessary.

  - Although hydrogen bond outliers are filtered by default, very little
    validation of secondary structure definitions is performed.

References
----------

  - Kabsch, W., & Sander, C. (1983).  Dictionary of Protein Secondary
    Structure: Pattern Recognition of Hydrogen-Bonded and Geometrical
    Features.  Biopolymers, 22, 2577-2637.

  - Fabiola et al. (...)
