Ligands
=======

**Why**

The goal of a crystallographic study is often to visualize the
interaction of a small molecule or ligand with a macromolecule. This is
core process in the development of new therapeutics. It is also not
uncommon to discover density for an unanticipated small molecule in
complex with a protein during the process of solving a structure. In
both cases it is necessary to fit the small molecule into density to
complete the atomic model. As part of this process it is often necessary
to generate appropriate stereochemical restraints for new ligands for
use in structure refinement.

**How**

The principal tool for fitting ligands into density in Phenix is
phenix.ligand\_fit. This identifies unfilled electron density in a map
and attempts to place the user defined ligand in the density by rotation
around any torsional degrees of freedom. The process requires an
electron density map, coordinates for the macromolecule, and information
about the ligand, either as coordinates or a chemical description which
can be used to generate coordinates. The output are the coordinates of
the fit ligand. After ligand(s) are fit, subsequent refinement steps
will require stereochemical restraints. In some cases these may be
present in the default restraint libraries, however, in many cases new
restraints may need to be generated. In Phenix, the phenix.elbow program
can be used to do this, starting from a variety of different formats.

**How to use the ligand fitting GUI:** `Click here <../reference/ligandfit_gui.html>`__

**How to use the phenix.elbow GUI:** `Click here <../reference/elbow_gui.html>`__

**Common issues**

-  `Frequently asked questions about ligands <../faqs/ligands.html>`__

**Related programs**

-  `phenix.guided\_ligand\_replacement <../reference/guided_ligand_replacement.html>`__: This
   program uses prior knowledge from a previously fit ligand to expedite
   the fitting of a similar ligand into the same or similar protein.
   This is very useful when studying a series of compounds for the same
   or related macromolecular targets.
-  `phenix.ligand\_identification <../reference/ligand_identification.html>`__: This
   program can be used to determine the identity of an unknown ligand by
   performing ligand fitting with a library of small molecules and then
   ranking each molecule by density fit and chemical interaction with
   the macromolecule.
-  `phenix.ligand\_pipeline <../reference/ligand_pipeline.html>`__: This
   program can be used to generate a near-finished structure of a
   protein-ligand complex starting from a current protein model,
   diffraction data, and information about ligands. It combines Xtriage,
   Phaser, eLBOW, phenix.refine, AutoBuild, and LigandFit, with optional
   interaction with Coot. It can significantly reduce the manual effort
   required for more difficult structures.

`Phenix reference manual for phenix.ligand\_fit <../reference/ligandfit.html>`__ `Phenix reference manual for phenix.elbow <../reference/elbow.html>`__
